SARTORIS 

By 

William Faulkner 


LONDON 
Chatto & Windus 

1954 
To 

SHERWOOD ANDERSON 

Through whose kindness I was first 
published, with the belief that this 
book will give hirrTftb reason to 
regret that fact 


PART ONE 


As usual, old man Falls had brought John Sartoris 
into the room with him, had walked the three miles in 
from the county Poor Farm, fetching, like an odor, like 
the clean dusty smell of liis faded overalls, the spirit of 
the dead man into that room where the dead man’s son 
sat and where the two of tliem, pauper and banker, 
would sit for a half an hour in the company of him 
who had passed beyond death and then returned. 

Freed as he was of time and flesh, he was a far more 
palpable presence than either of the two old men who 
sat shouting periodically into one another’s deafness 
while the business of the bank went forward in the next 
iwm and people in the adjoining stores on either side 
hstened to the indistinguishable uproar of their voices 
coming through the walb. He was far more palpable 
than the two old men cemented by a common deafness 
to a dead period and so drawn thin by the slow attenua- 
tion of days; even now, although old man Falls had 
departed to tramp the three miles back to that which 
he now called home, John Sartoris seemed to loom still 
m the room, above and about his son, with his bearded, 
hawklike face, so that as old Bayard sat with his 
crossed feet propped against the corner of the cold 

1 



hearth, holding the pipe in his hand, it seemed to him 
that he could hear his father’s breathing even, as though 
that other were so much more palpable than mere tran- 
siently articulated clay as to even penetrate into the 
uttermost citadel of silence in which his son lived. 

The bowl of the pipe was ornately carved, and it was 
charred with much usage, and on the bit were the prints 
of his father’s teeth, where he had left the very print 
of his ineradicable bones as though in enduring stone, 
like the creatures of that prehistoric day that were too 
grandly conceived and executed either to exist very 
long or to vanish utterly when dead from an earth 
shaped and furnished for punier things. Old Bayard 

sat holding the pipe in his hand. 

“What are you giving it to me for, after all this 

time?” he had asked. 

“Well, I reckon I’ve kept it long as Gunnel aimed 
for me to,” old man Falls answered. “A po’house ain’t 
no fitten place for anything of his’n, Bayard. And I m 
gwine on ninety-fo’ year old.” 

Later he gathered up his small parcels and left, but 
still old Bayard sat for some time, the pipe in his hand, 
rubbing the bowl slowly with his thumb. After a while 
John Sartoris departed also, withdrawn rather to that 
place where the peaceful dead contemplate their glam- 
orous frustrations, and old Bayard rose and thrust the 
pipe into his pocket and took a cigar from the humidor 
on the mantel. As he struck the match the door across 
the room opened and a man wearing a green eyeshade 
entered and approached. 

“Simon’s here, Colonel,” he said in a voice utterly 
without inflection. 

“What?” old Bayard said across the match. 

“Simon’s come.” 


2 



“Oh. All right.” 

The other turned and went out. Old Bayard 6ung the 
match into the grate and put the cigar in his pocket 
and closed his desk and took his. black felt hat from 
the top of it and followed the other from the room. The 
man in the eyeshade and the cashier were busy beyond 
the grille. Old Bayard stalked on through the lobby 
and passed through the door with its drawn green shade 
and emerged upon the street, where Simon in a linen 
duster and an ancient top hat held the matched geld- 
ings glittering in the spring afternoon, at the curb. 
There was a hitching-post there, which old Bayard re- 
tained with a testy disregard of industrial progress, 
but Simon never used it. Until the door opened and 
Bayard emerged from behind the drawn shades bearing 
the words “Bank Closed” in cracked gold leaf Simon 
retained his seat, the reins in his left hand and the 
thong of the whip caught smartly back in his right 
and usually the unvarying and seemingly incombustible 
fragment of a cigar at a swaggering*angle in his black 
face, talking to the shining team in a steady, lover-like 
flow. He spoiled horses. He admired Sartorises and he 
had for them a warmly protective tenderness, but he 
loved horses and beneath his hands the sorriest beast 
bloomed and acquired comeliness like a caressed woman, 
temperament like an opera star. 

Bayard closed the door behind him and crossed 
to the carriage with that stiff erectness which, as a 
countryman once remarked, if he ever stumbled, would 
meet itself falling down. One or two passers and a 
merchant or so in the adjacent doorways saluted him 
with a sort of florid servility. 

Nor did Simon dismount even then. With his race’s 
fane feehng for potential theatrics he drew himself up 

S 


and arranged the limp folds of the duster, communi- 
cating by some means the histrionic moment to the 
liorses so that they too flicked their glittering coats 
and tossed their leashed heads, and into Simon’s wizened 
black face theire came an expression indescribably 
majestical as he touched his whiphand to his hat-brim. 
Bayard got into the carriage and Simon clucked to the 
horses, and the onlookers, halted to admire the momen- 
tary drama of the departure, fell behind. 

There was something different in Simon’s air t<> 
day, in the very shape of his back and the angle of his 
hat ; he appeared to be bursting with something momen- 
tous and ill-contained. But he withheld it for the time 
being and at a dashing, restrained pace he drove among 
the tethered wagons about the square and swung into a 
broad street where what Bayard called paupers sped 
back and forth in automobiles; withheld it until the 
town was behind and they trotted on across burgeoning 
countryside cluttered still with gasoline-propelled 
paupers but at greater intervals, and his employer had 
settled back for the changing and peaceful monotony 
of the four-mile drive. Then Simon checked the team 
to a more sedate pace and turned his head. 

His voice was not particularly robust nor resonai^ 
yet somehow he could talk to old Bayard without 
culty. Others must shout in order to penetrate that wail 
of deafness within which Bayard lived, yet Simon could 
and did hold long, rambling conversations with him in 
that monotonous, rather high sing-song of his, Pf*"' 
ticularly while in the carriage, the vibration of which 

helped Bayard’s hearing a little. . 

“Mist’ Bayard done got home,” Simon remarked in 

a conversational tone. 

Old Bayard sat perfectly and furiously still for a 

4 



moment while his heart went on, a little too fast and a 
little too lightly, cursing his grandson for a furious 
moment; sat so still that Simon looked back and found 
him gazing quietly out across the land. Simon raised Ins 
voice a little. 

“He got offen de two o’clock train,” he continued. 
“Jumped off de wrong side and lit out th’ough de 
woods. Section han* seed ’im. Only he ain’t never come 
out home j'it when I lef’. I thought he wuz wid you, 
maybe.” Dust spun beneath the horses’ feet and moiled 
in a sluggish cloud behind. Against the thickening 
hedgerows their shadow rushed in failing surges, witli 
twinkling spokes and high-stepping legs in a futility 
of motion without progress. “Wouldn’t even git off at 
de dee-po,” Simon continued, with a kind of fretted 
exasperation, “de dee-po his own folks built. Jumpin’ 
off de bline side like a hobo. He never even had on no 
sojer-clothes. Jes’ a suit, like a drummer er somethin’. 
And when I ’members dem shiny boots and dem light 
yaller pants and dat ’ere double-jinted backin’-up strop 
he wo’ home las’ year . . .” He turned and looked back 
again. “Cunnel, you reckon dem foreign folks is done 
somethin’ ter him.^” 

“What do you mean.^” Bayard demanded. “Is he 
lame.?” 

“I mean, him sneakin’ into his own town. Sneakin’ 
into town on de ve’y railroad his own gran-pappy built, 
jes’ like he wuz trash. Dem foreign folks done done 
somethin’ ter him, er dey done sot dey po-llce after 
him. I kep’ a-tellin’ him when he fust w'ent off to dat 

’ere foreign war him and Mr. Johnny neither never had 
Tio business at ” 

Drive on!” Bayard said. “Drive on, damn your 
black hide.” 


V 


5 


Simon clucked to the horses and shook them into a 
swifter gait. The road went on between hedgerows 
paralleling them with the terrific antics of their shadow. 
Beyond the bordering gums and locusts and massed 
vines fields new-broken or being broken spread on 
toward patches of woodland newly green and splashed 
with dogwood and judas trees. Behind laborious plows 
viscid shards of new-turned earth glinted damply in 
the sun. 

This was upland country, lying in tilted slopes 
against the unbroken blue of the hills, but soon the road 
descended sheerly into a valley of good broad fields 
richly somnolent in the leveling afternoon, and pres- 
ently they drove upon Bayard’s own land and from 
time to time a plowman lifted his hand to the passing 
carriage. Then the road approached the railway and 
crossed it, and at last the house John Sartoris had 
built stood among locusts and oaks and Simon swung 
between iron gates and into a curving drive. 

There was a bed of salvia where a Yankee patrol had 
halted on a day long ago. Simon brought up here with 
a flourish and Bayard descended and Simon clucked 
to the team again and rolled his cigar to a freer angle 
and took the road back to town. 

Bavard stood for a while before his house. The white 
simplicity of it dreamed unbroken among ancient sun- 
shot trees. Wistaria mounting one end of the veranda 
had bloomed and fallen, and a faint drift of shattered 
petals lay palely about the dark roots of it and about 
the roots of a rose trained on to the same frame. The 
rose was slowly but steadily choking the other vine. It 
bloomed now thickly with buds no bigger than a thumb- 
nail and blown flowers no larger than silver dollars, 
myriad, odorless and unpickable. 

6 



But the house itself was still and serenely benignant 
and he mounted to the empty colonnaded veranda and 
crossed it and entered the hall. The house was silent, 
richly desolate of motion or any sound. He stopped in 
the middle of the hall. 

“Bayard.” 

The stairway with its white spindles and red carpet 
mounted in a tall slender curve into upper gloom. From 
the center of the ceiling hung a chandelier of crystal 
prisms and shades, fitted originally for candles but 
since wired for electricity. To the right of the entrance, 
beside folding doors rolled back upon a dim room 
emanating an atmosphere of solemn and seldom violated 
stateliness and known as the parlor, stood a tall mirror 
filled with grave obscurity like a still pool of evening 
water. At the opposite end of the hall checkered sun- 
light fell in a long slant across the door, and from 
somewhere beyond the bar of sunlight a voice rose and 
fell in a steady preoccupied minor, like a chant. The 
words were not distinguishable, but Bayard could not 
hear them at all. He raised his voice again. 

“Jenny.” 

The chanting ceased, and €is he turned toward the 
stairs a tall mulatto woman appeared in the slanting 
sunlight at the back door and came sibilantly into the 
house. Her faded blue garment was pinned up about 
her knees and it was darkly and irregularly blotched 
with moisture. Beneath it her shanks were straight and 
lean as the legs of a tall bird, and her bare feet were 
pale coffee-splashes on the dark polished floor. 

“Wuz you callin’ somebody, Gunnel?” she said, rais- 
ing her voice to penetrate his deafness. Bayard paused 
with his hand on the walnut newel post and looked down 
at the woman’s pleasant yellow face. 

7 


“Has anybody come out here this afternoon?” he 
asked. 

“Why, naw, suh,” Elnora answered, “Dey ain’t 
nobody here a-tall, dat I knows about. Miss Jenny done 
gone to her club-meetin’ in town dis evenin’,” she added. 
Bayard stood with his foot raised to the step, glower- 
ing at her. 

“Why in hell can’t you niggers tell me the truth 
about things?” he raged suddenly. “Or not tell me 
anything at all?” 

“Lawd, Cunnel, who’d be cornin’ out here, lessen you 
er Miss Jenny sont ’um?” But he had gone on, tramp- 
ing furiously up the stairs. The woman looked after 
him, then she raised her voice: “Does you want Isom, 
er anything?” He did not look back. Perhaps he had 
not heard lier, and slie stood and watched him out of 
sight. “He’s gittin’ old,” she said to herself quietly, 
and she turned on her sibilant bare feet and returned 
down the hall wlience she had come. 

Bayard stopped again in the upper hall. The west- 
ern windows were closed with lattice blinds, through 
which sunlight seeped in yellow dissolving bars that but 
served to increase the gloom. At the opposite end a tall 
door opened upon a shallow grilled balcony which 
offered the valley and the cradling semicircle of the 
eastern hills in panorama. On either side of this door 
was a narrow window set with leaded panes of vari- 
colored glass that, with the bearer of them, consti- 
tuted John Sartoris’ mother’s deathbed legacy to him, 
which his youngest sister had brought from Carolina in 
a straw-filled hamper in ’69. 

This was Virginia Du Pre, who came to them two 
years a wife and seven years a widow at thirty — a 

8 



slender woman with a delicate replica of the Sartoris 
nose and that expression of indomitable and utter 
weariness which all Southern women had learned to 
wear, bringing with her the clothing in which she stood 
and a wicker hamper filled with colored glass. It was 
she who told them of the manner of Bayard Sartoris’ 
death prior to the second battle of Manassas. She had 
told the story many times since (at eighty she still 
told it, on occasions usually inopportune) and as she 
grew older the tale itself grew richer and richer, taking 
on a mellow splendor like wine; until what had been a 
hare-brained prank of two heedless and reckless boys 
wild with their own youth had become a gallant and 
finely tragical focal point to which the history of the 
race had been raised from out the old miasmic swamps 
of spiritual sloth by two angels valiantly fallen and 
strayed, altering the course of human events and purg- 
ing the souls of men. 

That Carolina Bayard had been rather a handful 
even for Sartorises. Not so much a black sheep as a 
nuisance, all of whose qualities were positive and un- 
predictable. His were merry blue eyes, and his rather 
long hair fell in tawny curls about his temples. His 
high-colored face wore that expression of frank and 
high-hearted dullness which you imagine Richard First 
as wearing before he went Crusading, and once he 
hunted a pack of fox hounds through a rustic taber- 
nacle in which a Methodist revival was being held ; and 
thirty minutes later (having caught the fox) he re- 
turned alone and rode his horse into the ensuing indig- 
nation meeting. In a spirit of fun, purely : he believed 
too firmly in Providence, as all his actions clearly 
showed, to have any reUgious convictions whatever. So 

9 


when Fort Moultrie fell and the governor refused to 
surrender it, the Sartorises were privately a little glad, 
for now Bayard would have something to do. 

In Virginia, as an A.D.C. of Jeb Stuart’s, he found 
plenty to do. As the A.D.C. rather, for though Stuart 
had a large military family, they were soldiers trying 
to win a war and needing sleep occasionally: Bayard 
Sartoris alone was willing, nay eager, to defer sleep to 
tliat time when monotony should return to the world. 
But this was a holiday. 

The war was a godsend to Jeb Stuart also, and 
shortly thereafter, against the dark and bloody obscu- 
rity of the northern Virginia campaigns, Stuart at 
thirt}" and Bayard Sartoris at twenty-three stood 
briefly like two flaming stars garlanded with Fame’s 
burgeoning laurel and the myrtle and roses of Death, 
incalculable and sudden as meteors in General Pope’s 
troubled military sky; thrusting upon him like an un- 
willing garment that notoriety which his skill as a 
soldier could never have won him. And still in a spirit 
of pure fun: neither Jeb Stuart nor Bayard Sartoris, 
as their actions clearly showed, had any political con- 
victions involved at all. 

Aunt Jenny told the story first shortly after she 
came to them. It was Christmas time and they sat be- 
fore a hickory fire in the rebuilt library — Aunt Jenny ^ 
with her sad resolute face and John Sartoris bearded 
and hawk-like, and his three children and a guest, a 
Scottish engineer whom John Sartoris had met in 
Mexico in ’45 and who was now helping him to build 
his railroad. 

Work on the railroad had ceased for the holiday sea- 
son and John Sartoris and his engineer had ridden in 
at dusk from the suspended railhead in the hills to the 

10 



north, and they now sat after supper in the firelight. 
The sun had set ruddily, leaving the air brittle as thin 
glass with frost, and presently Joby came in with an 
armful of firewood. He put a fresh billet on the fire, and 
in the dry air the flames crackled and snapped, pop- 
ping in fading embers outward upon the hearth. 

“Chris’mus!” Joby exclaimed, with the grave and 
simple pleasure of his race, prodding at the blazing 
logs with the Yankee musket barrel which stood in the 
cliimney corner until sparks swirled upward into the 
dark maw of the chimney in wild golden veils. “Y’ear 
dat, chilluns.^” John Sartoris’ eldest daughter was 
twenty-two and would be married in June, Bayard 
was twenty, and the younger girl seventeen ; and so 
Aunt Jenny, for all her widowhood, was one of the 
chilluns too, to Joby. Then he replaced the musket bar- 
rel in its niche and fired a long pine sliver at the hearth 
in order to light the candles. But Aunt Jenny stopped 
him, and he was gone — a shambling figure in an old 
formal coat too large for him, stooped and gray with 
age; and Aunt Jenny, speaking always of Jeb Stuart 
as Mister Stuart, told her story. 

It had to do with an April evening, and coffee. Or 
the lack of it, rather ; and Stuart’s military family sat 
in the scented darkness beneath a new moon, talking 
of ladies and dead pleasures and thinking of home. 
Away in the darkness horses moved invisibly with rest- 
ful sounds, and bivouac fires sank to glowing points 
like spent fireflies, and somewhere neither near nor far, 
the General’s body servant touched a guitar in linger- 
random chords. Thus they sat in the poignance of 
pring and youth’s immemorial sadness, forgetting 
travail and glory, remembering instead other Virginian 
evemngs wdth fiddles among the myriad candles and 

11 



slender grave measures picked out with light laughter 
and lighter feet, thinking “When will this be again? 
Shall I make one?” — until they had talked themselves 
into a state of savage nostalgia and words grew shorter 
and shorter and less and less frequent. Then the Gen- 
eral roused himself and brought them back by speak- 
ing of colfec, or its lack. 

This talk of coffee began to end a short time later 
with a ride along midnight roads and then through 
woods black as pitch, where horses went at a walk and 
riders rode with saber or musket at arm’s length before 
them lest they be swept from saddle by invisible boughs, 
and continued until tlie forest thinned with dawn-ghosts 
and the party of twenty was well inside the Federal 
linos. Then the dawn accomplished itself yet more and 
all efforts toward concealment were discarded and they 
galloped again and crashed through astonished picket 
parties returning peacefully to camp, and fatigue 
parties setting forth with picks and axes and shovels 
in the golden sunrise, and swept yelling up the knoll 
where General Pope and his staff sat at breakfast al 
fresco. 

Two men captured a fat staff-major. The others 
pursued the fleeing breakfasters for a short distance 
into the sanctuary of the woods, but most of them 
rushed on to the General’s private commissary tent and 
emerged presently from the cyclonic demolition of it, 
bearing plunder. Stuart and the three officers with him 
halted their dancing mounts at the table and one of 
them swept up a huge blackened coffee-pot and ten- 
dered it to the General, and while the enemy shouted 
and fired muskets among the trees, they toasted one 
another in sugarless and crearaless scalding coffee, as 
with a loving-cup. 


12 



“General Pope, sir,” Stuart said, bowing to the cap- 
tured officer. He drank and extended the pot. 

‘TU drink it, sir,” the major replied. “And thank 
God he is not here to respond in person.” 

“I had remarked that he appeared to leave hur- 
riedly,” Stuart said. “A prior engagement, perhaps?” 

“Yes, sir. With General Halleck,” the major agreed 
drily. “I am sorry we have him for an opponent in- 
stead of Lee.” 

“So am I, sir,” Stuart answered. “I like General 
Pope in a war.” Bugles were shrilling among the trees 
far and near, sending the alarm in flying echoes from 
brigade to brigade lying about the forest, and drums 
were beating wildly to arms and erratic bursts of mus- 
ketry surged and trickled along the scattered outposts 
like the dry clatter of an opening fan, for the name 
Stuart speeding from picket to picket had peopled the 
blossoming peaceful woods with gray phantoms. 

Stuart turned in his saddle and his men came up and 
sat their horses and watched him alertly, their spare 
eager faces like mirrors reflecting their leader’s con- 
stant consuming flame. Then from the flank there came 
something like a concerted volley, striking the coffee- 
pot from Ba^'ard Sartoris’ hand and clipping and 
snapping viciously among the dappled branches above 
their heads. 

“Be pleased to mount, sir,” Stuart said to the cap- 
tive major, and though his tone was exquisitely 
courteous, all levity was gone from it. “Captain Wylie, 

yon have the heaviest mount: will you ?” The 

Captain freed his stirrup and hauled the prisoner up 
behind him. “Forward,” the General said and whirled, 
roweling his bay^ and with the thunderous coordination 
of a single cenUur they swept down the knoll and 

13 



crashed into the forest at the point from which the 
volley had come, before it could be repeated. Blue-clad 
shapes plunged scattering before and beneath them, 
and they rushed on among trees vicious with Mini ma 
like wasps. Stuart now carried his plumed hat in his 
hand, and his long tawny locks, tossing to the rhythm 
of his speed, appeared as gallant flames smoking with 
the wild and self-consuming splendor of his daring. 

Behind them and on one flank muskets still banged 
and popped at their flashing phantoms, and from 
brigade to brigade lying spaced about the jocund forest 
bugles shrilled their importunate alarms, Stuart bore 
gradually to the left, bringing all the uproar into his 
rear. The country became more open and they swung 
into column at the gallop. The captured major bounced 
and jolted behind Captain Wylie, and the General 
reined back beside the gallant black thundering along 
beneath its double load. 

“I am distressed to inconvenience you thus, sir,” he 
began with his exquisite courtesy. “If you will indicate 
the general location of your nearest horse picket, I 
shall be most happy to capture a mount for you.” 

“Thank you, General,” the major replied. “But 
majors can be replaced much easier than horses. I 
shall not trouble you.” 

“Just as you wish, sir,” Stuart agreed stiffly. He 
spurred on to the head of the column again. They now 
galloped along a faint trace that was once a road. It 
wound on between vernal palisades of undergrowth and 
they followed it at a rapid but controlled gait and de- 
bouched suddenly into a glade, and a squadron of Yan- 
kee cavalry reined back in amazement, then hurled 
forward again. 

Without faltering Stuart whirled his party and 

14 



plunged back into the forest. Pistol balls were 
thinly about their heads, and the flat tossing reports 
were trivial as snapping twigs above the converging 
thunder of hooves. Stuart swerved from the road and 
they crashed headlong through undergrowth. The 
Federal horse came yelling behind them and Stuart led 
his party in a tight circle and halted it panting in a 
dense swampy copse, and they heard the pursuit sweep 
past. 

They pushed on and regained the road and retraced 
their former course, silently and utterly alert. To the 
left the sound of the immediate pursuit crashed on, 
dying away. Then they cantered again. Presently the 
woods thickened and forced them to a trot, then a walk. 
Although there was no more firing and the bugles too 
had ceased, into the silence, above the strong and rapid 
breathing of the horses and the sound of their own 
hearts in their ears, was a nameless something — a tense- 
ness seeping from tree to tree like an invisible mist, 
filling the dewy morning woods with portent although 
birds flashed swooping from tree to tree, unaware or 
disregardful of it. 

A gleam of white through the trees ahead ; Stuart 
raised his hand and they halted and sat their horses, 
watching him quietly and holding their breath with 
listening. Then he advanced again and broke through 
the undergrowth into another glade. They followed, 
and before them stood the knoll with the deserted break- 
fast table and the rifled commissary tent. They trotted 
wanly across and halted at the table while the General 
scribbled hastily upon a scrap of paper. The glade lay 
quiet and empty of threat beneath the mounting golden 
day ; laked in it lay a deep and abiding peace like 
golden wine, yet beneath this solitude and permeating 

16 



it, was tliat nameless and waiting portent, patient and 
brooding and sinister. 

“Your sword, sir,” Stuart commanded. The prisoner 
removed his weapon and Stuart took it and pinned his 
scribbled note to the table top. The note read: “General 
Stuart’s compliments to General Pope, and he is sorry 
to have missed him again. He will call again tomorrow.*^ 

Stuart gathered up his reins. “Forward,” he said. 

They descended the knoll and crossed the empty 
glade and at an easy canter they took the road they had 
traversed that daw’n ; the road that led home. Stuart 
glanced back at his captive, at the gallant black with 
its double burden. “If you will direct us to your nearest 
cavalry picket, I will provide you with a proper 
mount,” he offered again. 

“Will General Stuart, cavalry leader and General 
Lee’s eyes, jeopardize his safety and that of his men 
and his cause in order to provide for the temporary 
comfort of a minor prisoner to his sword?” the major 
said. “This is not bravery : it is the rashness of a heed- 
less and headstrong boy. There are fifteen thousand 
men within a radius of two miles of this point; even 
General Stuart cannot conquer that many, though they 
are Yankees, single-handed.” 

“Not for the prisoner, sir,” Stuart replied haughtily, 
“but for the officer suffering the fortune of war. No 
gentleman would do less.” 

“No gentleman has any business in this war,” the 
major retorted. “There is no place for him here. He is 
an anachronism, like anchovies. At least General Stuart 
did not capture our anchovies,” he added tauntingly. 
“Perhaps he will send Lee for them in person.” 

“Anchovies,” repeated Bayard Sartoris, who gal- 
loped near by, and he whirled his horse. Stuart shouted 

16 



at him, but Sartoris lifted his reckless stubborn hand 
and flashed on; and as the General would have turned 
to follow, a Yankee picket fired his piece from the road- 
side and dashed into the woods, shouting the alarm. 
Immediately other muskets exploded on all sides, and 
from the forest to the right came the sound of a con- 
siderable body put suddenly into motion, and behind 
them in the direction of the invisible knoll, a volley 
crashed. A third officer spurred up and caught Stuart’s 
bridle. 

“Sir, sir!” he exclaimed. “What would you do?” 

Stuart held his mount rearing, and another volley 
rang behind them, dribbling off into single scattered re- 
ports, crashed again, and the noise to the right swelled 
nearer. “Let go, Alan,” Stuart said. “He is my friend.” 

But the other clung to the bridle. “It is too late,” 
he cried. “Sartoris can only be killed; you would be 
captured.” 

“Forward, sir, I beg,” the captive major added. 
“What is one man to a renewed belief in mankind?” 

“Think of Lee, for God’s sake. General !” the aide 
implored. “Forward!” he shouted to the troop, spur- 
ring his own mount and dragging the General’s onward 

as a body of Federal horse broke from the woods behind 
them. 

And so,” Aunt Jenny finished, “Mister Stuart went 
on and Bayard rode back after those anchovies, with 

SrJ shooting at him. He rode yelling, 

Ya^niiih, Yaaaiiiih, come on, boys!’ right up the 
knoll and jumped his horse over the breakfast table 
and rode it into the wrecked commissary tent, and a 
cook who was hidden under the mess stuck his arm out 
and shot Bayard in the back with a derringer* 

Mister Stuart fought his way out and got back 

17 



home without losing but two men. He always spoke well 
of Bayard. He said he was a good officer and a fine 
cavalryman, but that he was too reckless.” 

They sat quietly for a time in the firelight. The 
flames leaped and popped on the hearth and sparks 
soared in wild swirling plumes up the chimney, and 
Bayard Sartoris’ brief career swept like a shooting 
star across the dark plain of their mutual remembering 
and suffering, lighting it with a transient glare like a 
soundless thunder-clap, leaving a sort of radiance when 
it died. The guest, the Scottish engineer, had sat 
quietly, listening. After a time he spoke. 

“When he rode back, he was no actually certain 
there were anchovies, was he?” 

“The Yankee major said there were,” Aunt Jenny 
replied. 

“Ay.” The Scotsman pondered again. “And did 
ISIuster Stuart return next day, as he said in’s note?” 

“He went back that afternoon,” Aunt Jenny an- 
swered, “looking for Bayard.” Ashes soft as rosy 
feathers shaled glowing on to the hearth and faded to 
the softest gray. John Sartoris leaned forward into 
tlie firelight and punched at the blazing logs with the 
Yankee musket-barrel. 

“That was the goddamnedest army the world ever 
saw, I reckon,” he said. 

“Yes,” Aunt Jenny agreed. “And Bayard was the 
goddamnedest man in it.” 

“Yes,” John Sartoris admitted soberly, “Bayard 
was wild.” 

The Scotsman spoke again. “This Muster Stuart, 
who said your brother was reckless — wlio was he?” 

“He was the cavalry general Jeb Stuart,” Aunt 
Jenny answered. She brooded for a while upon the fire; 

18 



her pale indomitable face held for a moment a tranquil 
tenderness. “He had a strange sense of humor,” she 
said. “Nothing ever seemed quite so diverting to him 
as General Pope in his night-shirt.” She dreamed once 
more on some far-away place beyond the rosy battle- 
ments of the embers. “Poor man,” she said; then she 
said quietly, “I danced a valse with him in Baltimore 
in ’58,” and her voice was proud and still as banners 
in the dust. 

But the door was closed now, and what h’ght passed 
through the colored panes was richly solemn. To Bay- 
ard’s left was his grandson’s room, the room in which 
his grandson’s wife and her child had died last October. 
He stood beside this door for a moment, then he opened 
it quietly. The blinds were closed and the room had 
that breathless tranquillity of unoccupation, and he 
closed the door and tramped on with that hea\'y-footed 
obliviousness of the deaf and entered his own bedroom 
and crashed the door behind him, as was his way of 
shutting a door. 

He sat down and removed his shoes, the shoes that 
were made to his measure twice a year by a St. Louis 
house, and in his stockings he went to the window and 
looked down upon his saddled mare tethered to a mul- 
berry tree in the back yard and a negro lad lean as a 
hound, richly static beside it. From the kitchen, in- 
visible from this window, Elnora’s endless minor ebbed 
and flowed, unheard by Bayard, upon the lazy scene. 

He crossed to the closet and drew out a pair of 
scarred riding-boots and stamped into them and took 
a cigar from the humidor on his night table, and he 
stood for a time with the cold cigar between his teeth. 
Through the cloth of his pocket his hand had touched 

19 



the pipe there, and lie took it out and looked at it again, 
and it seemed to him that he could still hear old man 
Falls* voice in roaring recapitulation : “Gunnel was 
settin’ thar in a cheer, liis sock feet propped on the 
po’ch railin’, smokin’ this hyer very pipe. Old Louvinia 
was settin’ on the steps, shellin’ a bowl of peas fer 
supper. And a feller was glad to git even peas some- 
times, in them days. And you was settin’ back again’ 
the post. They wa’n’t nobody else thar ’cep’ you’ aunt, 
the one ’fo’ Miss Jenny come. Gunnel had sont them 
two gals to Memphis to yo’ gran’pappy when he fust 
went to Virginny with that ’ere regiment that turnt 
right around and voted him outen the colonelcy. Voted 
’im out because he wouldn’t be Tom, Dick and Harry 
with ever’ skulkin’ camp-robber that come along with 
a salvaged muskit and claimed to be a sojer. You was 
about half-grown then, I reckon. How old was you then, 
Bayard?” 

“Fourteen.” 

“Hey?” 

“Fourteen. Do I have to tell you that every time you 
tell me this damn storJ^^” 

“And thar you was a-settin’ when they turned in at 
the gate and come trottin’ up the carriage drive. 

“Old Louvinia drapped the bowl of peas and let out 
one squawk, but Gunnel shet her up and told her to run 
and git his boots and pistols and have ’em ready at the 
back do*, and you lit out fer the barn to saddle that 
stallion. And wlien them Yankees rid up and stopped 
— they stopped right whar that flower-bed is now 
they wa’n’t nobody in sight but Gunnel, a-settin’ thar 
like he never even heerd tell of no Yankees. 

“The Yankees they sot thar on the bosses, talkin’ 
’mongst they selves if this w’as the right house or not, 

20 



and Gunnel settin’ thar with his sock feet on the railin’, 
gawkin’ at ’em like a hill-billy. The Yankee officer he 
tole one man to ride back to the barn and look fer that 

’ere stallion, then he says to Gunnel : 

“‘Say, Johnny, whar do the rebel John Sartoris 

live?’ 

“‘Lives down the road a piece,’ Gunnel says, not 
battin’ a eye even. ‘ ’Bout two mile,’ he says. ‘But you 
won’t find ’im now. He’s away fightin’ the Yanks agin. 

“ ‘Well, I reckon you better come and sliow us the 
way, anyhow,’ the Yankee officer says. 

“So Gunnel he got up slow and tole ’em to let ’im 
git his shoes and walkin’-stick, and limped into the 
house, leavin’ ’em settin’ thar waitin’. 

“Soon’s he was out of sight he run. Old Louvinia 
was waitin’ at the back do’ with his coat and boots and 
pistols and a snack of cawn bread. That ’ere other 
Yankee had rid into the barn, and Gunnel taken the 
things from Louvinia and wropped ’em up in the coat 
and started acrost the back yard like he was jest takin’ 
a walk. ’Bout that time the Yankee come to the barn 
do’. 

“ ‘They ain’t no stock hyer a-tall,’ the Yank says. 

“ ‘I reckon not,’ Gunnel says. ‘Gap’m says fer you 
to come on back,’ he says, goin* on. He could feel that 
’ere Yank a-watchin’ him, lookin’ right ’twixt his 
shoulder blades whar the bullet would hit. Gunnel says 
that was the hardest thing he ever done in his life, 
walkin’ on thar acrost that lot with his back to’a’ds that 
Yankee without breakin’ into a run. He was aimin’ 
to’a’ds the comer of the barn, where he could put the 
house between ’em, and Gunnel says hit seemed like 
he’d been walkin’ a year without gittin’ no closer and 
not darin’ to look back. Gunnel says he wa’n’t even 

21 


thinkin’ of nothin’ ’cep’ he was glad the gals wa’n’t at 
home. He sajs he never give a thought to you’ aunt 
back thar in the house, because he says she was a full* 
blood Sartoris and she was a match fer any jest a dozen 
Yankees. 

“Then the Yank hollered at him, but Cunnel kep* 
right on, not lookin’ back nor nothin’. Then the Yank 
hollered agin and Cunnel says he could hyear the hoss 
movin’ and he decided hit was time to stir his shanks. 
He made the corner of the barn jest as the Yank shot 
the fust time, and by the time the Yank got to the 
corner, he was in the hawg-lot, tearin’ through the 
jimson weeds to’a’ds the creek whar you was waitin’ 
with the stallion hid in the w’illers. 

“And thar you was a-standin’, holdin’ the hoss, and 
that ’ere Yankee patrol yellin’ up behind, until Cunnel 
got his boots on. And then he tole you to tell yo’ aunt 
he wouldn’t be home fer supper.” 

“But what are you giving it to me for, after all this 
time?” he had asked, fingering the pipe, and old man 
Falls had said a poorliouse w’as no fit place for it. 

“A tiling he toted in his pocket and got enjoyment 
outen, in them days. Hit ’ud be different, I reckon, 
while we w'as a-buildin’ the railroad. He said often 
enough in them days we was all goin’ to be in the po’- 
house by Sat’d’y night. Only I beat him, thar. I got 
thar fo’ he did. Or the cemetery he meant mo’ likely, 
him ridin’ up and down the survey with a saddle-bag of 
money night and day, keepin’ jest one cross tie ahead 
of the po’house, like he said. That ’us w'hen hit 
changed. When he had to start killin’ folks. Them two 
cyarpet-baggers stirrin’ up niggers, that he walked 
right into the room w'har they was a-settin’ behind a 

22 



table with they pistols layin’ on the table, and that 
robber and that other feller he kilt, all with that same 
dang der*nger. When a feller has to start killin’ folks, 
he ’most always has to keep on killin’ ’em. And when 
he does, he’s already dead hisself.” 

It showed on John Sartoris’ brow, the dark shadow 
of fatality and doom, that night when he sat beneath 
the candles in the dining-room and turned a wineglass 
in his fingers while he talked to his son. The railroad 
was finished) and that day he had been elected to the 
state legislature after a hard and bitter fight, and doom 
lay on his brow, and weariness. 

“And so,” he said, “Redlaw’ll kill me tomorrow, for 
I shall be unarmed. I’m tired of killing men. . . . Pass 
the wine, Bayard.” 

And the next day he was dead, whereupon, as though 
he had but waited for that to release him of the clumsy 
cluttering of bones and breath, by losing the frustra- 
tion of his own flesh lie could now stiffen and shape that 
which sprang from him into the fatal semblance of his 
dream; to be evoked like a genie or a deity by an illiter- 
ate old man’s tedious reminiscing or by a charred pipe 
from which even the rank smell of burnt tobacco had 
long since faded away. 

Old Bayard roused himself and went and laid the 
pipe on his chest of drawers. Then he quitted the room 
and tramped heavily down the stairs and out through 
the back. 

The negro lad waked easily and untethered the mare 
and held the stirrup. Old Bayard mounted and remem- 
bered the cigar at last and fired it. The negro opened 
the gate into the lot and trotted on ahead and opened 
the second gate and let the rider into the field beyond. 

2S 



Bayard rode on, trailing his pungent smoke. From 
somewhere a ticked setter came up and fell in at the 
mare’s heels. 

Elnorc stood barelegged on the kitchen floor and 
soused her mop into the pail and thuihped it on the 
floor again. 

Sinner riz fum de moaner’s bench. 

Sinner jump to de penance bench; 

When de preacher ax ’im whut de reason why, 

Say, “Preacher got de women jes* de same ez I.” 

Oh, Lawd, oh, Lawd ! 

Dat’s whut de matter wid de church today. 

2 

Simon’s destination was a huge brick house set well 
up to the street. The lot had been the site of a fine old 
colonial house which stood among magnolias and oaks 
and flowering shrubs. But the house had burned, and 
some of the trees had been felled to make room for an 
architectural garbling so imposingly terrific as to pos- 
sess a kind of majesty. It was a monument to the 
frugality (and the mausoleum of the social aspirations 
of his women) of a hill-man who had moved in from a 
small settlement called Frenchman’s Bend and who, 
as Miss Jenny Du Pre put it, had built the handsomest 
house in Frenchman’s Bend on the most beautiful lot 
in Jefferson. The hill-man had stuck it out for two 
years, during which his women-folk sat on the veranda 
all morning in lace-trimmed “boudoir caps” and sjjent 
the afternoons in colored silk, riding about town in a 
rubber-tired surrey; then the hill-man sold his house 
to a newcomer to the town and took his women back 
to the country and doubtless set them to work again. 

24 



A number of motor cars ranked along the curb lent 
a formally festive air to the place, and Simon with his 
tilted cigar stub wheeled up and drew rein and 
indulged in a brief, colorful altercation with a negro 
sitting at the w'heel of a car parked before the hitching- 
block. “Don’t block off no Sartoris ca’iage, black boy,” 
Simon concluded, when the other had moved the motor 
and permitted him access to the post. “Block off de 
commonality, ef you wants, but don’t intervoke no 
equipage waitin’ on Gunnel er Miss Jenny. Dey won’t 
stan’ fer it.” 

He descended and tethered the horses, and his spirit 
mollified by the rebuke administered and laved with 
the beatitude of having gained his own way, Simon 
paused and examined the motor car with curiosity and 
no little superciliousness tinged faintly w'ith respectful 
envy, and spoke affably with its conductor. But not 
for long, for Simon had sisters in the Lord in this 
kitchen, and presently he let himself into the yard and 
followed the gravel driveway around to the back. He 
could hear the party going on as he passed beneath 
the windows — ^that sustained, unintelligible gabbling 
with which white ladies could surround themselves with- 
out effort and which they seemed to consider a neces- 
sary (or unavoidable) adjunct to having a good time. 
The fact that it was a card-party would have seemed 
neither paradoxical nor astonishing to Simon, for time 
and much absorbing experience had taught him a fine 
tolerance of white folks’ vagaries and for those of ladies 
of any color. 

The hill-man had built his house so close to the street 
that the greater part of the original lawn with its fine 
old trees lay behind it. There were once crape myrtle 
and syringa and lilac and jasmine bushes without order, 

25 



and massed honeysuckle on fences and tree trunks; and 
after the first house had burned, these had taken the 
place and made of its shaggy informality a mazed and 
scented jungle loved of mocking-birds and thrushes, 
where boys and girls fingered on spring and summer 
nights among drifting fireflies and choiring whip-poor- 
wills and usually the fiquid tremolo of a screech owl. 
Then the hill-man had bought it and cut some of the 
trees in order to build his house near the street after 
the country fashion, and chopped out the jungle and 
whitewashed the remaining trees and ran his barn- and 
hog- and chicken-lot fences between their ghostly 
trunks. He hadn’t remained long enough to learn of 
garages. 

Some of the antiseptic desolation of his tenancy had 
faded now, and its present o^ner had set out more 
shrubbery — jasmine and mock-orange and verbena — 
with green iron tables and chairs beneath them, and a 
pool and a tennis court; and Simon went on with dis- 
creet assurance, and on a consonantless drone of female 
voices he rode into the kitchen, where a thin woman in 
a funereal purple turban, poising a beaten biscuit 
heaped with mayonnaise, and a mountainous one in the 
stained apron of her calling drinking melted ice cream 
from a saucer, rolled their eyes at him. 

“I seed him on de street, and he looked bad ; he jes’ 
don’t favor hisself,” the visitor was saying as Simon 
entered, but they dropped the theme of the conversa- 
tion and made him welcome. 

“Ef it ain’t Brother Strother,” they said in unison. 
“Come in, Brother Strother. How is you?” 

“Po’ly, ladies ; po’ly,” Simon replied. He doffed his 
hat and undamped his cigar stub and stowed it away 

26 



in the hat. “I’se had a right smart mis’ry in de back. 
Is y’all kep’ well?” 

“Right well, I thank you, Brother Strother,” the 
visitor replied- Simon drew a chair to the table, as he 
was bidden. 

“Whut you gwine eat, Brother Strother?” the cook 
demanded hospitably. “Dey’s party fixin’s, en dey’s 
some col’ greens en a little sof’ ice cream lef’ fum din- 
ner.” 

“I reckon I’ll have a little ice cream en some of dem 
greens, Sis’ Rachel,” Simon replied. “My teef ain’t so 
much on party doin’s no mo’.” The cook rose with 
majestic deliberation and waddled across to a pantry 
and reached down a platter. She was one of the best 
cooks in Jefferson; no mistress dared protest against 
the social amenities of Rachel’s kitchen. 

“Ef you ain’t de beatin’es’ man!” the first guest 
exclaimed. “Ratin’ ice cream at yo’ age !” 

“I been eatin’ ice cream sixty years,” Simon said. 
‘*Whut reason I got fer quittin’ now?” 

“Dat’s right. Brother Strother,” the cook agreed, 
placing the dish before him. “Eat yo’ ice cream when 

you kin git it. Jes’ a minute en I’ll Here, Melo- 

ney,” she interrupted herself as a young light negress 
in a smart white apron and cap entered, bearing a tray 
of plates containing remnants of edible edifices copied 
from pictures in ladies’ magazines and possessing 
neither volume nor nourishment, with which the party 
had been dulling its palates against supper, “git 
Brother Strother a bowl of dat ’ere ice cream, honey.” 

The girl clashed the tray into the sink and rinsed a 
bowl at the water tap while Simon watched her with 
his still little eyes. She whipped the bowl through a 

27 


towel with a fine shew of derogatory carelessness, and 
with her chin at a supercilious angle she clattered on 
her high heels across the kitchen, still under Simon’s 
unwinking regard, and slammed a door behind her. 
Then Simon turned his head. 

‘‘Yes, ma’am,” he repeated, “I been eatin’ ice cream 
too long ter quit at m^^ age.” 

“Dey won’t no vittles hurt you ez long ez you kin 
stomach ’um,” the cook agreed, raising her saucer to 
her lips again. The girl returned and with her head 
still averted she set the bowl of viscid liquid before 
Simon, who, under cover of this movement, dropped 
his hand on her thigh. The girl smacked him sharply 
on the back of his gray head with her flat palm. 

“Miss Rachel, can’t you make him keep his hands 

to hlsself?” she said. 

“Ain’t you ’shamed,” Rachel demanded, but without 
rancor, “a ole grayhead man like you, wid a fam’ly of 
grown chillen and one foot in de graveyard?” 

“Hush yo’ mouf, woman,” Simon said placidly, 
spooning spinach into his melted ice cream. Ain t dey 

erbout breakin’ up in yonder yit.^” 

“I reckon dey’s erbout to,” the other guest answered, 
putting another laden biscuit into her mouth with a 
gesture of elegant gentility; “seems like dey’s talkin’ 

louder.” 

“Den dey’s started playin’ again,” Simon corrected. 
“Talkin’ jes’ eased off whiles dey et. Yes, suh, dey’s 
started playin’ again. Dat’s white folks. Nigger ain’t 
got sense ernough ter play cards wid all dat racket 
gwine on.” 

But they were breaking up. Miss Jenny Du Pre had 
just finished a story which left the three at her table 

28 


avoiding one another’s eyes a little self-consciously, as 
was her way. Miss Jenny traveled very little, and in 
Pullman smoking-rooms not at all, and people won- 
dered where she got her stories, who had told them to 
her. And she repeated them anywhere and at any time, 
choosing the wrong moment and the wrong audience 
with a cold and cheerful audacity. Young people liked 
her, and she was much in demand as a chaperone for 
picnic parties. 

She now spoke across the room to the hostess. “I m 
going home, Belle,” she stated. “I think we are all 
tired of your party. I know I am.” The hostess was a 
plump, youngish woman and her cleverly-rouged face 
show^ now a hysterical immersion that was almost 
repose, but when Miss Jenny broke into her conscious- 
ness with the imminence of departure, this faded 
quickly and her face resumed its familiar expression 
of strained and vague dissatisfaction and she protested 
conventionally but with a petulant sincerity, as a well- 
bred child might. 

But Miss Jenny was adamant. She rose and her 
slender wrinkled hand brushed invisible crumbs from 
the bosom of her black silk dress. “If I stay any longer. 
I’ll miss Bayard’s toddy-time,” she explained with her 
usual forthrightness. “Come on, Narcissa, and I’ll drive 
you home.” 

“I have my car, thank you. Miss Jenny,” the young 
woman to whom she spoke replied in a grave contralto, 
rising also; and the others got up with sibilant gather- 
ing motions above the petulant modulation of the 
hostess’ protests, and they drifted slowly into the hall 
and clotted again before various mirrors, colorful and 
shrill. Miss Jenny pushed steadily toward the door. 

“Come along, come along,” she repeated. “Harry 

29 


it 


Mitchell won’t want to run into all this gabble when 
he comes home from work.” 

“Then he can sit in the car out in the garage,” the 
hostess rejoined sharply. “I do wish you wouldn’t go, 
Miss Jenny; I don’t tliink I’ll ask you again.” 

But Miss Jenny only said “Good-bye, good-bye” 
with cold affability, and with her delicate replica of 
the Sartoris nose and that straight, grenadier’s back 
of hers which gave the pas for erectness to only one 
back in town — that of her nephew Bayard — she stood at 
the steps, where Narcissa Bendow joined her, bringing 
with her like an odor that aura of grave and serene 
repose in which she dwelt. “Belle meant that, too,” Miss 
Jenny said. 

“Meant what. Miss Jenny?” 

“About Harry. . . . Now, where do you suppose 
that damn nigger went to?” They descended the steps 
and from the parked motors along the curb came muf- 
fled starting explosions, and the two women traversed 
the brief flower-bordered walk to the street. “Did you 
see which way my driver went?” Miss Jenny asked of 
the negro in the nearest car. 

“He went to’ds de back, ma’am.” The negro opened 
the door and slid his legs, clad in army O.D. and a 
pair of linoleum putties, to the ground. “I’ll go git 
’im.” 

“Thank you. Well, thank the Lord, that’s over,” 
she added. “It’s too bad folks haven’t the sense or cour- 
age to send out invitations, then shut up the house and 
go away. All the fun of parties is in dressing up and 
getting there.” Ladies came steadily in shrill groups 
down the walk and got into cars or departed on foot 
with bright, not quite musical calls to one another. 
The sun was down behind Belle’s house, and when the 

30 


women passed from the shadow into the level bar of 
sunlight beyond, they became delicately brilliant as 
paroquets. Narcissa Benbow wore gray, and her eyes 
were violet, and in her face was that tranquil repose of 
lilies. 

“Not children’s parties,” she protested. 

“I’m talking about parties, not about having fun,” 
Miss Jenny said. “Speaking of children — what’s the 
news from Horace?” 

“Oh, hadn’t I told you?” the other said quickly. “I 
had a wire yesterday. He landed in New York Wednes- 
day. It was such a mixed-up sort of message, I never 
could understand what he was trying to tell me, 
except that he would have to stay in New York for a 
week or so. It was over fifty words long.” 

“Was it a straight message?” Miss Jenny asked. 
The other said yes and she added: “Horace must have 
got rich, like the soldiers say all the Y.M.C.A. did. 
Well, if it has taught a man like Horace to make 
money, the war was a pretty good thing, after all.” 

“Miss Jenny! How can you talk that way, after 
John’s — after . . 

Fiddlesticks,” Aliss Jenny said. **The war just gave 
John a good excuse to get himself killed. If it hadn’t 
been that, it would have been some other way that w'ould 
have been a bother to everybody around.” 

“Miss Jenny !” 

“I know, my dear. I’ve lived with these bullheaded 
bartonses for eighty years, and I’ll never give a single 

k- satisfaction of shedding a tear over 

him. What did Horace’s message say?” 

“It was about something he was bringing home with 
him, the other answered, and her serene face filled 
with a sort of fond exasperation. “It was such an in- 

31 


coherent message. . . . Horace never could say any- 
thing clearly from a distance.” She mused again, 
gazing down the street with its tunnel of oaks and elms, 
between w'hich sunlight fell in spaced tiger bars. “Do 
you suppose he could have adopted a war-orphan?” 

“War-orphan,” Miss Jenny repeated. “More likely 
it’s some war-orphan’s mamma.” 

Simon appeared at the corner of the house, wiping 
his mouth on the back of his hand, and crossed the 
lawn with shuffling celerity. His cigar was not visible. 

“No,” the other said quickly, with grave concern. 
“You don’t believe he would have done that? No, no, 
he wouldn’t have; Horace wouldn’t have done that. He 
never does anything without telling me about it first. 
He would have written; I know he would. You really 
don’t think that sounds like Horace, do you? A thing 
like that?” 

“Hmph,” IVIiss Jenny said through her high-bridged 
Norman nose. “An innocent like Horace straying with 
that trusting air of his among all those man-starved 
European women? He wouldn’t know it himself, until 
it was too late; especially in a foreign language. I bet 
in every town’ he was in over seven days, his landlady 
or somebody was keeping his supper on the stove when 
he was late, or holding out sugar on the other men to 
sweeten his coffee with. Some men are born to always 
have a woman making a doormat of herself for him, 
just as some men are born cuckolded. . . . How old 
are you?” 

“I’m still twenty-six, Miss Jenny,” the younger 
woman replied equably. Simon unhitched the horses 
and he stood now beside the carriage in his Miss Jenny 
attitude. It differed from the bank one; there was now 


in it a gallant and protective deference. Miss Jenny 
examined the still serenity of the other’s face. 

“Why don’t you get married, and let that baby look 
after himself for a while? Mark my words, it won’t be 
six months before some other woman will be falling all 
over herself for the privilege of keeping his feet dry, 
and he won’t even miss you.” 

“I promised mother,” the other replied quietly and 
without offense. ... “I don’t see why he couldn’t 
have sent an intelligible message.” 

“Well . . .” Miss Jenny turned to her carriage. 
“Maybe it’s only an orphan, after all,” she said with 
comfortless reassurance. 


“I’ll know soon, anyway,” the other agreed, and she 
crossed to a small car at the curb and opened the door. 

Miss Jenny got in her carriage and Simon mounted 
and gathered up the reins. “Let me know when you 
hear again,” she called as the carriage moved forward. 
“Drive out and get some more flowers when you want 


’em.” 


“Thank you. Good-bye.” 

All right, Simon.” The carriage moved on again, 

and again Simon withheld his news until they were out 
of town. 


Mist’ Bayard done got home,” he remarked, in his 
former conversational tone. 

^I^Tiere is he?” Miss Jenny demanded immediately. 

MX ™ come out to de place yit,” Simon answered. 
1 speck he went to de graveyard.” 

“Nonsense,” Miss Jenny snapped. “No Sartoris ever 

goes ^ the cemetery but once.’ . . . Does Colonel know 
he’s home?” 


“Yessum. I tole him, but he 
I wuz tellin’ him de troof.” 


don’t ack like he believed 




“You mean nobody’s seen him but you?” 

“I ain’t seed ’im neither,” Simon disclaimed. “Section 
han’ seed ’im jump off de train and tole me ” 

“You damn fool nigger!” Miss Jenny stormed. “And 
you went and blurted a fool thing like that to Bayard? 
Haven’t you got any more sense than that?” 

“Section han’ seed *im,” Simon repeated stubbornly. 
“I reckon he knowed Mist’ Bayard when he seed ’im.” 

“Well, where is he, then?” 

“He mought have gone to de graveyard,” Simon 
suggested. 

“Drive on !” 

Miss Jenny found her nephew with two bird dogs 
in his office. The room was lined with bookcases con- 
taining rows of heavy legal tomes bound in dun calf 
and emanating an atmosphere of dusty and undis- 
turbed meditation, and a miscellany of fiction of the 
historicahromantic school (all Dumas was there, and 
the steady progression of the volumes now constituted 
Bayard’s entire reading, and one volume lay always 
on the night-table beside his bed) and a collection of 
indiscriminate objects — small packets of seed, old 
rusted spurs and bits and liarness buckles, brochures 
on animal and vegetable diseases, ornate tobacco con- 
tainers which people had given him on various occa- 
sions and anniversaries and which he had never used, 
inexplicable bits of rock and desiccated roots and grain 
pods — all collected one at a time and for reasons which 
had long since escaped his memory, yet preserved just 
the same. The room contained an enormous closet with 
a padlocked door, and a big table littered with yet more 
casual objects, and a locked roll-top desk (keys and 
locks were an obsession with him), and a sofa and three 

34 



big leather cliairs. This room was always referred to 
as the office, and Bayard now sat here with his hat on 
and still in his riding boots, transferring bourbon 
whisky from a small rotund keg to a silver-stoppered 
decanter, while the two dogs watched him with majestic 
gravity. 

One of the dogs was quite old and nearly blind. It 
spent most of the day lying in the sun in the backyard 
or, during the hot summer day, in the cool dusty ob- 
scurity beneath the kitchen. But toward the middle of 
the afternoon it went around to the front and waited 
there quietly and gravely until the carriage came up 
the drive; and when Bayard had descended and entered 
the house it returned to the back and waited again until 
Isom led the mare up and Bayard came out and 
mounted. Then together they spent the afternoon 
going quietly and unhurriedly about the meadows and 
fields and woods in their seasonal mutations — the man 
on his horse and the ticked setter gravely beside him, 
while the descending evening of their lives drew toward 

its peaceful close upon the kind land that had bred 
them both. 

The young dog was not yet two years old; his net 
was too hasty for the sedateness of their society over- 
long, and though at times he set forth with them or 
came quartering up, splashed and eager, from some- 
where to join them in midfield, it was not for long, and 
soon he must dash away with his tongue flapping and 
the tense, delicate feathering of his tail in pursuit of 
the maddening elusive smells with which the world sur- 
rounded him and tempted him from every thicket and 
copse and ravine. 

’s boots were wet to the tops and the soles 
were caked with mud, and he bent with intent preoccu- 

85 


pation over liis keg and bottle under the sober curiosity 
of tlie dogs. The keg was propped bung-upward in a 
second chair and he was siphoning the rich brown 
liquor delicately into the decanter by means of a rubber 
tube. Miss Jennv entered with her black bonnet still 
perched on the exact top of her trim white head and 
the dogs looked up at her, the older with grave dignity, 
the younger more quickly, tapping his tail on the floor 
with fawning diffidence. But Bayard didn’t raise his 
head. Miss Jenny closed the door and stared coldly at 
his boots. 

“Your feet are wet,” she stated. Still he didn’t look 
up, but held the tube delicately in tlie bottle-neck while 
the liquor mounted steadily in tlie decanter. At times 
his deafness was very convenient, more convenient than 
actual, perhaps; but who could know certainly? “You 
go upstairs and get those boots off,” Miss Jenny com- 
manded, raising her voice; “I’ll fill the decanter.” 

But within the serene walled tower of his deafness 
his imperturbability did not falter until the decanter 
was full and he pinched the tube and raised it and 
drained it back into the keg. The older dog had not 
moved, but the younger one had retreated beyond 
Bayard, where it lay motionless and alert, its head on 
its crossed forepaws, watching Miss Jenny with one 
melting, unwinking eye. Bayard drew the tube from 
the keg and looked at her for the first time. “What did 
you say ?” 

But Miss Jenny returned to the door and opened it 
and shouted into the hall, eliciting an alarmed response 
from the kitchen, followed presently by Simon in the 
flesh. “Go up and get Colonel’s slippers,” she directed. 
When she turned into the room again neither Bayard 
nor the keg was visible, but from the open closet door 

86 


there protruded the young dog’s interested hindquar- 
ters and the tense feathering of his barometric tail; 
then Bayard thrust the dog out of the closet with his 
foot and emerged himself and locked the door behind 
him. 

“Has Simon come in yet?” he asked. 

“He’s coming now,” she answered; “I just called 
him. Sit down and get those wet boots off.” At that 
moment Simon entered with the slippers, and Bayard 
sat obediently and Simon knelt and drew his boots off 
under Miss Jenny’s martinet eye. “Are his socks dry?” 
she asked. 

“No’m, dey ain’t wet,” Simon answered. But slic 
bent and felt them herself. 

“Here,” Bayard said testily, but Miss Jenny ran 
her hand over both his feet with brusque imperturb- 
ability. 

“Precious little fault of his if they ain’t,” she said 
across the topless wall of his deafness. “And then you 
have to come along with that fool yarn of yours.” 

“Section han’ seed ’im,” Simon repeated stubbornly, 
thrusting the slippers on Bayard’s feet; “I ain’t never 
said I seed him.” He stood up and rubbed his hands 
on his thighs. 

Bayard stamped into the slippers. “Bring the toddy 
fixings, Simon.” Then to his aunt, in a tone which he 
contrived to make casual: “Simon says Ba3'ard got off 
the train this afternoon.” But Miss Jenny was storm- 
ing at Simon again. 

“Come back here and get these boots and set ’em 
behind the stove,” she said. Simon returned and sidled 
swiftly to the hearth and gathered up the boots. “And 
take these dogs out of here, too,” she added. “Thank 
the I^rd he hasn’t thought about bringing his horse 

u. 37 



in with him.” Immediately the old dog came to his feet, 
and followed by the younger one’s diffident alacrity, 
departed with that same assumed deliberation with 
which both Bayard and Simon obeyed Miss Jenny’s 
brisk implacability. 

“Simon says ” Bayard repeated. 

“Simon says fiddlesticks,” Miss Jenny snapped. 
“Have you lived with Simon sixty years without learn- 
ing that he don’t know the truth when he sees it?” And 
she followed Simon from the room and on to the 
kitchen, and while Simon’s tall yellow daughter bent 
over her biscuit board and Simon filled a glass pitcher 
w'ith fresh water and sliced lemons and set them and 
a sugar bowl and two tall glasses on a tray. Miss Jenny 
stood in the doorway and curled Simon’s grizzled 
remaining hair into tighter kinks yet. She had a fine 
command of language at all times, but when her ire 
was aroused she soared without effort to sublime 
heights. Hers was a forceful clarity and a colorful 
simplicity and a bold use of metaphor that Demos- 
thenes would have envied and which even mules com- 
prehended and of whose intent the most obtuse persons 
remained not long in doubt; and beneath it Simon’s 
head bobbed lower and lower and the fine assumption 
of detached preoccupation moulted like feathers from 
about him, until he caught up the tray and ducked 
from the room. Miss Jenny’s voice followed him, 
descending ea:>ily with a sweeping comprehensiveness 
that included a warning and a suggestion for future 
conduct for Simon and Elnora and all their descend- 
ants, actual and problematical, for some years. 

“And tlie next time,” she concluded, “you, or any 
section hand, or brakeman, or delivery boy either, sees 
or hears anything you think will be of interest to 

38 



Colonel, you tell me about it first; I’ll do all the telling 
after that.” She gave Elnora another glare for good 
measure and returned to the oflSce, where her nephew 
was stirring sugar and water carefully in the two 
glasses. 

Simon in a white jacket officiated as butler — doubled 
in brass, you might say. Only it was not brass, but 
silver so fine and soft that some of the spoons were 
worn now almost to paper thinness where fingers in 
their generations had held them; silver which Simon’s 
grandfather Joby had buried on a time beneath the 
ammoniac barn floor while Simon, aged tliree, in a 
single filtliy garment, had looked on with a child’s 
grave interest in the curious game. 

An effluvium of his primary calling clung about him 
always, however, even when he was swept and garnished 
for church and a little shapeless in a discarded Prince 
Albert coat of Bayard’s; and his every advent into the 
dining-room with dishes brought with him, and the 
easy attitudes into which he fell near the sideboard 
while answering Miss Jenny’s abrupt questions or 
while pursuing some fragmentary conversation which 
he and Bayard had been engaged in earlier in the day, 
disseminated, and his exits left behind him, a faint 
nostalgia of the stables. But tonight he brought the 
dishes in and set them down and scuttled immediately 

back to the kitchen : Simon realized that again he had 
talked too much. 

Miss Jenny, with a shawl of white wool about her 
shoulders against the evening’s coolness, was doing the 
talking tonight, immersing herself and her nephew in 
a wealth of trivialities — petty doings and sayings and 
gossip— a behavior which was not Uke Miss Jenny at 

S9 



I 


all. She had opinions, and a pithy, savagely humorous 
way of stating them, but it was very seldom that she 
descended to gossip. Meanwhile Bayard had shut him- 
self up in that walled tower of his deafness and raised 
the drawbridge and clashed the portcullis to, where 
you never knew whether he heard you or not, while his 
corporeal self ate its supper steadily. Presently they 
had done, and Miss Jenny rang the little silver bell 
at her hand and Simon opened the pantry door and 
received again the cold broadside of her displeasure, 
and shut the door and lurked behind it until they had 
left the room. 

Bayard lit his cigar in the office and Miss Jenny 
followed him there and drew her chair to the table be- 
neath the lamp and opened the daily Memphis news- 
paper. She enjoyed humanity in its more colorful 
mutations, preferring lively romance to the most 
impeccable of dun fact, so she took in the more lurid 
afternoon paper, even though it was yesterday’s when 
it reached her, and read with cold avidity accounts of 
arson and murder and violent dissolution and adultery; 
in good time and soon the American scene was to fur- 
nish her with diversion in the form of bootleggers’ 
wars, but this was not yet. Her nephew sat beyond the 
mellow downward pool of the lamp, his feet braced 
against the corner of the hearth, from which his boot- 
soles and the boot-soles of John Sartoris before him 
had long since worn the varnish away, puffing his cigar. 
He was not reading, and at intervals Miss Jenny 
glanced above her glasses and across the top of the 
paper at him. Then she read again, and there was no 
sound in the room save the sporadic rustling of the 
page. 

After a time he rose, with one of his characteristic 

40 


plunging movements, &nd she watched him as he 
crossed the room and passed through the door and 
banged it behind him. She read on for a while longer, 
but her attention had followed the heavy tramp of his 
feet up the hall, and when this ceased she rose and laid 
the paper aside and followed him to the front door. 

The moon had got up beyond the dark eastern wall 
of hills and it lay without emphasis upon the valley, 
mounting like a child’s balloon behind the oaks and 
locusts along the drive. Bayard sat with his feet on 
the veranda rail, in the moonlight. His cigar glowed 
at spaced intervals, and a shrill monotone of crickets 
rose from the immediate grass, and further away, from 
among the trees, a fairy-like piping of young frogs 
like endless silver small bubbles rising. A thin, source- 
less odor of locust drifted up, intangible as fading 
tobacco-wraiths, and from the rear of the house, up 
the dark hall, Elnora’s voice floated in meaningless 
minor suspense. 

Miss Jenny groped in the darkness beside the door, 
and from beside the yawning lesser obscurity of the 
mirror she took Bayard’s hat from the hook and car- 
ried it out to him and put it in his hand. “Don’t sit out 
here too long, now. It ain’t summer yet.” 

He grunted indistinguishably, but he put the hat on 
and she turned and went back to the office, and finished 
the paper and folded it and laid it on the table. She 
snapped the light off and mounted the dark stairs to 
her room. The moon shone above the trees at this height 
and fell in broad silver bars through the eastern 
^•indows. 

Before turning on the light she crossed to the 
southern wall and raised a window there, upon the 
crickets and frogs and somewhere a mocking-bird. 

41 



Outside the window was a magnolia tree, but it was not 
in bloom yet, nor had the honeysuckle massed along 
the garden fence flowered. But this would be soon, and 
from here she could overlook the garden, could look 
down upon Cape jasmine and syringa and callacanthus 
where the moon lay upon their bronze and yet unflow- 
ered sleep, and upon other shoots and graftings from 
the far-away Carolina gardens she had known as a 
girl. 

Just beyond the comer, from the invisible kitchen, 
Elnora’s voice welled in mellow, falling suspense. “All 
folks talkin’ ’bout heaven ain’t gwine dar,” Elnora 
sang, and presently she and Simon emerged into the 
moonlight and took the path to Simon’s cabin below 
the barn. Simon had fired his cigar at last, and the evil 
smoke of it trailed behind him, fading. But when they 
had gone the rank pungency of it seemed still to linger 
within the sound of the crickets and of the frogs upon 
the silver air, mingled and blended inextricably with 
the dying fall of Elnora’s voice: “All folks talkin’ 
’bout heaven ain’t gwine dar.” 

His cigar was cold, and he moved and dug a match 
from his w'aistcoat and relit it and braced his feet again 
upon the railing, and again the drifting sharpness of 
tobacco lay along the windless currents of the silver 
air, straying and fading slowly with locust-breaths and 
the ceaseless fairy reiteration of crickets and frogs. 
There was a mocking-bird somewhere down the valley, 
and after a while another sang from the magnolia at 
the corner of the garden fence. An automobile passed 
along the smooth valley road, slowed for the railway 
crossing, then sped on. Before the sound of it had 

42 



died away the wliistle of the nine-thirty train drifted 
dowTi from the hills. 

Two long blasts with dissolving echoes, two short 
following ones, but before it came in sight his cigar w'as 
cold again and he sat holding it in his fingers and 
watched the locomotive drag its string of yellow win- 
dows up the valley and into the hills once more, where 
after a time it whistled again, arrogant and resonant 
and sad. John Sartoris had sat so on this veranda and 
watched his two daily trains emerge from tlie hills and 
cross the valley into the hills, with lights and smoke 
and a noisy simulation of speed. But now the railway 
belonged to a syndicate and there were more than two 
trains on it that ran from Lake Michigan to the Gulf 
of Mexico, completing his dream, while John Sartoris 
slept among martial cherubim and the useless vainglory 
of whatever God he did not scorn to recognize. 

Old Bayard’s cigar was cold again. He sat with it 
dead in his fingers and watched a tall shape emerge 
from the lilac bushes beside the garden fence and cross 
the patchy moonlight toward the veranda. His grand- 
son wore no hat and he came on and mounted the steps 
and stood with the moonlight bringing the hawklike 
planes of his face into high relief while his grandfather 
sat with his dead cigar and looked at him. 

“Bayard, son?” old Bayard said. Young Bayard 
stood in the moonlight. His eyesockets were cavernous 
shadows. 

“I tried to keep him from going up there on that 
goddam little popgun,” he said at lost with brooding 
savageness. Then he moved again and old Bayard 
lowered his feet, but his grandson only dragged a chair 
violently up beside him and flung himself into it. His 

4 $ 



motions were abrupt also, like his grandfather’s, but 
controlled and flowing for all their violence. 

“Why in hell didn’t you let me know you were com- 
ing?” old Bayard demanded. “What do you mean, 
straggling in here like this?” 

“I didn’t let anybody know.” Young Ba3'ard dug a 
cigarette from his pocket and raked a match on his 
shoe. 

“What.?” 

“I didn’t tell anybody I was coming,” he repeated 
above the cupped match, raising his voice. 

“Simon knew it. Do you inform nigger servants of 
your movements instead of your own granddaddy?” 

“Damn Simon, sir,” young Bayard shouted. “Who 
set him to watching me?” 

“Don’t yell at me, boy,” old Bayard shouted in turn. 
His grandson flung the match away and drew at the 
cigarette in deep, troubled draughts. “Don’t wake 
Jenny,” old Bayard added more mildly, striking a 
match to his cold cigar. “All right, are you?” 

“Here,” young Ba^'ard said, extending his hand, 
“let me hold it. You’re going to set your mustache on 
fire.” But old Bayard repulsed him sharply and sucked 
stubbornly and impotently at the match in his unsteady 
fingers. 

“I said, are you all right?” he repeated. 

“Why not.?” young Bayard snapped. “Takes damn 
near €is big a fool to get hurt in a war as it does in 
peacetime. Damn fool, that’s what it is.” He drew at 
the cigarette again, then he hurled it, not half con- 
sumed, after the match. “There was one I had to lay 
for four days to catch. Had to get Sibleigh in an old 
crate of an Ak. W. to suck him in for me. Wouldn’t 
look at anything but cold meat, him and his skull and 

44 



bones. Well, he got it. Stayed on him for six thousand 
feet, put a whole belt right into liis cockpit. You could 
’a’ covered ’em all with your hat. But the bastard just 
wouldn’t burn.” His voice rose again as he talked on. 
Locust drifted up in sweet gusts, and the crickets and 
frogs were clear and monotonous as pipes blown 
drowsily by an idiot boy. From her silver casement the 
moon looked down upon the valley dissolving in opaline 
tranquillity into the serene mysterious infinitude of the 
hills, and young Bayard’s voice went on and on, re- 
counting violence and speed and death. 

“Hush,” old Bayard said again, “You’ll wake 
Jenny.” And his grandson’s voice sank obediently, but 
soon it rose again, and after a time Miss Jenny 
emerged with tlie white woolen shawl over her night- 
dress and came and kissed him. 

“I reckon you’re all right,” she said, “or you 
wouldn’t be in such a bad humor. Tell us about 
Johnny.” 

“He was drunk,” young Bayard answered harshly, 
“or a fool. I tried to keep him from going up there, 
on that damn Camel. You couldn’t see your hand tliat 
morning. Air all full of hunks of cloud, and any fool 
could ’a’ known that on their side it’d be full of Fokkers 
that could reach twenty-five thousand, and him on a 
damn Camel. But he was hell-bent on going up there, 
damn near to Lille. I couldn’t keep him from it. He 
shot at me,” young Bayard said; “I tried to drive 
him back but he gave me a burst. He was already high 
as he could get, but they must have been five thousand 
fwt above us. They flew all over him. Hemmed him up 
like a damn calf in a pen while one of them sat right 
on his tail until he took fire and jumped. Then they 
streaked for home.” Locust drifted and drifted on the 

45 



still air, and the silver rippling of the frogs. In the 
magnolia at the corner of the house the mocking-bird 
sang; down the valley the other one replied. 

“Streaked for home, with the rest of his gang,” 
young Bayard said, “him and his skull and bones. It 
was Ploeckner,” he added, and for the moment his voice 
was still and untroubled with vindicated pride. “He 
was one of the best they had. Pupil of Richthofen’s.” 

“Well, that’s something,” Miss Jenny agreed, strok- 
ing his head. 

Young Bayard brooded for a time. 

“I tried to keep him from going up there on that 
goddam little popgun,” he burst out again. 

“What did you expect, after the way you raised 
him?” Miss Jenny asked. “You’re the oldest. . . . 
You’ve been to the cemetery, haven’t you?” 

“Yessum,” he answered quietly. 

“What’s that?” old Bayard demanded. 

“That old fool Simon said that’s where you were. 
. . . You come on and eat your supper,” she said 
briskly and firmly, entering his life again without a 
by-j’our-leave, taking up the snarled threads of it after 
her brisk and capable fashion, and he rose obediently. 

“What’s that?” old Bayard repeated. 

“And you come on in, too.” Miss Jenny swept him 
also into the orbit of her will as you gather a garment 
from a chair in passing. “Time you were in bed.” They 
followed her to the kitchen and stood while she delved 
into the ice-box and set food on the table, and a pitcher 
of milk, and drew up a chair. 

“Fix him a toddy, Jenny,” old Bayard suggested. 
But Miss Jenny vetoed this immediately. 

“Milk’s what he wants. I reckon he hod to drink 
enough whisky during that war to last him for a while. 

46 



Bayard used to never come home from his without 
wanting to ride his horse up the front steps and into 
the house. Come on, now,” and she drove old Bayard 
firmly out of the kitchen and up the stairs. *‘You go 
on to bed, you hear? Let him alone for a while.” She 
saw his door shut and entered young Bayard’s room 
and prepared his bed, and after a while from her own 
room she heard him mount the stairs. 

His room was treacherously illumined by the moon, 
and without turning on the light he went and sat on 
the bed. Outside the windows the interminable crickets 
and frogs, as though the moon’s rays were thin glass 
impacting among the trees and shrubs and shattering 
in brittle musical rain upon the ground ; and above this 
and with a deep, timbrous quality, the measured respi- 
rations of the pump in the electric plant beyond the 
barn. 

He dug another cigarette from his pocket and lit it. 
But he took only two draughts before he flung it away. 
And then he sat quietly in the room which he and John 
had shared in the young masculine violence of their 
twinship, on the bed where he and his wife had lain 
the last night of his leave, the night before he went 
back to England and out to the Front again, where 
John already was. Beside him on the pillow the wild 
bronze swirling of her hair was hushed now in the dark- 
ness, and she lay holding his arm with both hands 

against her breast while they talked quietly, soberly 
at last. 

But he had not been thinking of her then. When he 
thought of her who lay rigid in the dark beside him, 
holding his arm tightly to her breast, it was only to be 
a little savagely ashamed of the heedless thing he had 
done to her. He was thinking of his brother whom he 

47 



had not seen in over a year, thinking that in a month 
they would see one another again. 

Nor was he thinking of her now, although the walls 
held, like a withered £ower in a casket, something of 
that magical chaos in which they had lived for two 
months, tragic and transient as a blooming of honey- 
suckle and sharp as the odor of mint. He was thinking 
of his dead brother; the spirit of their violent comple- 
menting days lay like dust everywhere in the room, 
obliterating that other presence, stopping his breath- 
ing, and he went to the window and flung the sash 
crashing upward and leaned there, gulping air into 
his lungs like a man who has been submerged and who 
still cannot believe that he has reached the surface 
again. 

Later, lying naked between the sheets, he waked 
himself with his own groaning. The room was filled 
now with a gray light, sourceless and chill, and he 
turned his head and saw Miss Jenny, the woolen shawl 
about her shoulders, sitting in a chair beside the bed. 

“What’s the matter?” he said. 

“That’s what I want to know,” Miss Jenny an- 
swered. “You make more noise than that water pump. 

“I want a drink.” 

Miss Jenny leaned over and raised a glass from the 
floor beside her. Bayard had risen to his elbow and he 
took the glass. His hand stopped before tlie glass 
reached his mouth and he hunched on his elbow, the 

glass beneath his nose. 

“Hell,” he said, “I said a drink.” 

“You drink that milk, boy,” Miss Jenny commanded. 
“You think I’m going to sit up aU night just to feed 
you whisky? Drink it, now.” 

48 



He emptied the glass obediently and lay back. Miss 
Jenny set the glass on the floor. 

“What time is it?” 

“Hush,” she said. She laid her hand on his brow. 
“Go to sleep.” 

He rolled his head on the pillow, but he could not 
evade her hand. 

“Get away,” he said. “Let me alone.” 

“Hush,” Miss Jenny said. “Go to sleep.” 


49 



PART TWO 


Simon said : “You ain’t never yit planted nothin’ whar 
hit ought ter be planted.” He sat on the bottom step, 
whetting the blade of a hoe with a file. Miss Jenny 
stood with her caller at the edge of the veranda above 
him, in a man’s felt hat and heavy gloves. A pair of 
shears dangled below her waist, glinting in the morn- 
ing sunlight. 

“And whose business is that?” she demanded. “Yours, 
or Colonel’s? Either one of you can loaf on this porch 
and tell me where a plant will grow best or look best, 
but if either of you ever grew as much as a weed out 
of the ground yourselves, I’ve never seen it. I don’t 
give two whoops in the bad place where you or Colo- 
nel, either, thinks a flower ought to be planted: I 
plant my flowers just exactly where I want ’em to 

be planted.” 

“And den dares ’um not ter come up,” Simon added. 
“Dat’s de way you en Isom gyardens. Thank de Tawd 
Isom ain’t got to make his livin’ wid de sort of gyar- 
denin’ he learns in dat place.” Still whetting at the 
hoe blade he jerked his head toward the comer of the 
house. 

He wore a disreputable hat, of a fabric these many 

50 



years anonymous. Miss Jenny stared coldly down upon 
this hat. 

“Isom made his living by being born black,” Miss 
Jenny snapped. “Suppose you quit scraping at that 
hoe and see if you can’t dare some of the weeds in that 
salvia bed to come up.” 

“I got to git a aidge on dis curry-comb,” Simon said. 
“You go’n out dar to yo’ gyarden: I’ll git dis bed 
cleaned up.” He scraped steadily at the hoe blade. 

“You’ve been at that long enough to find out you 
can’t possibly wear that blade down to the handle with 
just a file,” Miss Jenny said. “You’ve been at it ever 
since breakfast. I heard you. You get on out there 
where folks passing will think you’re working, anyhow.” 

Simon groaned dismally and spent a half minute lay- 
ing the file aside. He laid it on a step, then he picked 
it up and moved it to another step. Then he laid it 
against the step behind him. He ran his thumb along 
the blade, examining it with morose hopefulness. 

“Hit mought do now,” he said. “But hit’ll be jes’ 
like weedin’ wid a curry-c ” 

“You try it, anyway,” Miss Jenny said. “Maybe 
the weeds’ll think it’s a hoe. You go give ’em a chance 
to, anyhow.” 

^ Ise gwine, Ise gwine,” Simon answered pettishly, 
rising and hobbling away. “You go’n see erbout dat 
place o’ yo’n ; I’ll ’tend ter dis.” 

Miss Jenny and the caller descended the steps and 
went on toward the comer of the house. 

“Why he’d rather sit there and rasp at that new 
hoe with a file instead of grubbing up a dozen blades of 
grass in that salvia bed, I can’t see,” Miss Jenny said. 
'But he’ll do it. He’d sit there and scrape at that hoe 
until it looked like a saw blade, if I’d let him. Bayard 

61 



bought a lawn-mower three or four years ago — God 
knows what for — and turned it over to Simon. The 
folks that made it guaranteed it for a year. They didn’t 
know Simon, though. I often thought, reading about 
those devastations and things in the paper last year, 
what a good time Simon would have had in the war. He 
could have shown ’em things about devastation they 
never thought of. Isom !” she shouted. 

They entered the garden and Miss Jenny paused at 
the gate. “You, Isom!” 

This time tliere was a reply, and Miss Jenny went 
on with her caller and Isom lounged up from some- 
where and clicked the gate after him. 

“Why didn’t you ” Miss Jenny looked back over 

her shoulder, then she stopped and regarded Isom’s 
suddenly military figure with brief and cold astonish- 
ment. He now wore khaki, with a div’isional emblem on 
the shoulder and a tarnished service stripe on his cuff. 
His lean sixteen-year-old neck rose from the slovenly 
collar’s limp, overlarge embrace and a surprising 
amount of wrist was visible below the cuffs. The 
breeches bagged hopelessly into the unskillful wrapping 
of the putties which, with either a fine sense foV the 
unique or a bland disregard of military usage, he had 
donned prior to his shoes, and the soiled overseas cap 
came down regrettably on his bullet head. 

“Where did you get those clothes?” The sunlight 
glinted on Miss Jenny’s shears, and Miss Benbow in 
her white dress and soft straw hat turned also and 
looked at him with a strange expression. 

“Dey’s Caspey’s,” Isom answered. “I jes’ bor’d ’um.” 

“Caspey?” Miss Jenny repeated. “Is he home?” 

“Yessum. He got in las’ night on de nine-thirty.” 

52 



“Last night, did he? Where is he now? Asleep, I 
reckon P” 

“Yessum. Dat’s whar he wuz ^len I lef’ home.” 

“And I reckon that’s how you borrowed his uni- 
form,” Miss Jenny said tartly. “Well, let him Bleep 
this morning. Give him one day to get over the war. 
But if it made a fool out of him like it did out of 
Bayard, he’d better put that thing on again and go 
back to it. I’ll declare, men can’t seem to stand any- 
thing.” She went on, the guest in lier straight white 
dress following. 

“You are awfully hard on men, not to have a husband 
to bother with, Miss Jenny,” she said. “Besides, 3'ou’re 
judging all men by your Sartorises.” 

“They ain’t my Sartorises,” Miss Jenny disclaimed 
promptly; “I just inherited ’em. But you just wait: 
you’ll have one of your own to bother with soon ; you 
just wait until Horace gets home, then see how long it 
takes him to get over it. IVIen can’t stand anything,” 
she repeated, “Can’t even stand helling around with no 
worry and no responsibility and no limit to all the 
meanness they can think about wanting to do. Do \’ou 
think a man could sit day after day and month aher 
month in a house miles from nowhere and spend tlie 
time between casualty lists tearing up bedclothes and 
window curtains and table linen to make lint, and 
watching sugar and flour and meat dwindling away, 
and using pine knots for light because there aren’t any 
candles and no candlesticks to put ’em in if there were, 
and hiding in nigger cabins while drunken Yankee 
generals set fire to the house your great-great-grand- 
father built and you and all your folks were born in? 
Don t talk to me about men suffering in war.” ^liss 
Jenny snipped larkspur savagely. “Just you wait until 

53 



Horace comes home ; then you’ll see. Just a good excuse 
lor ’em to make nuisances of themselves and stay in the 
way while the women-folks are trying to clean up the 
mess they left with their fighting. John at least had 
consideration enough, after he’d gone and gotten him- 
self into something where he had no business, not to 
come back and worry everj'body to distraction. But 
Bayard now, coming back in the middle of it and 
having everybody thinking he was settled down at last, 
teaching at that Memphis flying school, and then mar- 
rying that fool girl.” 

“Miss Jenny !” 

“Well, I don’t mean that, but she’d ought’ve been 
spanked, hard. I know: didn’t I do the same thing, 
myself.^ It was all that harness that Bayard wore. 
Talk about men being taken in by a uniform!” She 
clipped larkspur. “Dragging me up there to the wed- 
ding, mind you, with a church full of rented swords 
and some of Bayard’s pupils trying to drop roses on 
’em when tliey came out. I reckon some of ’em were not 
his pupils, because one of ’em finally did drop a handful 
that missed everything and fell in the street.” She 
snipped larksjmr savagely. “I had dinner with ’em one 
night. Sat in the hotel an hour until they remembered 
to come for me. Then we stopped at a delicatessen and 
Bavard and Caroline got out and went in and came 
back with about a busliel of packages and dumped 
’em into the car, where they leaked grease on my new 
stockings. That was tlie dinner I’d been invited to, 
mind you ; tliere wasn’t a sign of anything that looked 
or smelled like a stove in the whole place. I didn’t offer 
to help ’em. I told Caroline I didn’t know anything 
about that sort of liousekceping because m3' folks were 
old-fashioned enough to cook food. 

54 


“Then the others came in — some of Bayard’s soldier 
friends, and a drove of other folks’ wives, near as I 
could gather. Young women that ought to’ve been at 
home, seeing about supper, gabbling and screeching in 
that silly way young married women have when they’re 
doing something they hope their husbands won’t like. 
They were all unwrapping bottles — about two dozen, 
I reckon, and Bayard and Caroline came in with that 
silver I gave ’em and monogrammed napkins and that 
delicatessen fodder that tasted like swamp-grass, on 
paper plates. We ate it there, sitting on the floor or 
standing up or just wherever you happened to be.” 

“That was Caroline’s idea of keeping house. She 
said they’d settle dmvn when they got old, if the war 
was over by then. About thirty-five, I suppose she 
meant. Thin as a rail ; there wouldn’t have been much 
to spank. But she’d ought to have had it, just the same. 
Soon as she found out about the baby, slie named it. 
Named it nine months before it was born and told 
everybody about it. Used to talk about it like it was 
her grandfather or something. Always saying Bayard 
won’t let me do this or that or the other.” 

Miss Jenny continued to clip larkspur, the caller 
tall in a white dress beside her. Tlie fine and huge sim- 
plicity of the house rose among thickening trees, the 
garden lay in sunlight bright with bloom, myriad with 
scent and with a drowsy humming of bees — a steady 
golden sound, as of sunlight become audible— all the 
impalpable veil of the immediate, the familiar; just 
beyond it a girl with a bronze swirling of hair and a 
small, suiyle body in a constant epicene unrepose, a 
dyna^c fixation like that of carven sexless figures 
caught m moments of action, striving, a mechanism all 
Of whose members must move in performing the most 

55 



trivial action, her wild hands not accusing but pas- 
sionate still beyond the veil impalpable but sufficient. 

Miss Jenny stooped above the flower bed, her narrow 
back, though stooping, erect still, indomitable. A thrush 
flashed modestly across the bright air and into the mag- 
nolia tree in a dying parabola. “And then, when he had 
to go back to the war, of course he brought her out 
here and left her on my hands.” The caller stood 
motionless in her white dress, and Miss Jenny said, 
“No, I don’t mean that.” She snipped larkspur. 

“Poor women,” she said, “I reckon we do have to 
take our revenge wherever and whenever we can get it. 
Only she ought to’ve taken it out on Bayard.” 

“\^Tlen slie died,” Narcissa said, “and he couldn’t 
know about it; couldn’t have come to her if he had.^ 
And you can say that?” 

“Bayard love anybody, that cold devil?” ISIiss Jenny 
clipped larkspur. “He never cared a snap of his fingers 
for anybody in his life except John.” She snipped lark- 
spur savagely. “Swelling around here like it was our 
fault, like we made ’em go to that war. And now he’s 
got to have an automobile, got to go all the way to 
Memphis to buy one. An automobile in Bayard Sar- 
toris’ barn, mind you; him that won’t even lend the 
bank’s money to a man that owns one. . . • Do you 
want some sweet peas?” 

“Yes, please,” Narcissa answered. Miss Jenny 
straightened up, then she stopped utterly still. 

“Just look yonder, will you?” She pointed with the 
shears. “That’s how' they suffer from war, poor things.” 
Beyond a frame of sweet peas Isom in his khaki strode 
solemnly back and forth. Upon his right shoulder was 
a hoe and on his face an expression of rapt absorption, 

56 


and as lie reversed at the end of his beat he murmured 
to himself in measured singsong. 

“You, Isom!” Miss Jenny shouted. 

He halted in mid stride, still at shoulder arms. 
‘•Ma’am?” he said mildly. Miss Jenny continued to 
glare at him, and his military bearing faded and he 
lowered his piece and executed a sort of effacing move- 
ment within his martial shroud. 

“Put that hoe down and bring that basket over here. 
That’s the first time in your life you ever picked up a 
garden tool of your own free will. I w'ish I could dis- 
cover the kind of uniform that would make you dig in 
the ground vith it; I’d certainly buy you one.” 

“Yessum.” 

“If you want to play soldier, you go off somewhere 
wth Bayard and do it. I can raise flowers without any 
help from the army,” she added, turning to the guest 
with her handful of larkspur, “And what are you 
laughing at?” she demanded. 

“You both look so funny,” the younger woman ex- 
plained. “You looked so much more like a soldier than 
poor Isom, for all his uniform.” She touched her eyes 
with her finger tips. “I’m sorry : please forgive me for 
laughing.” 

“Hmph,” Miss Jenny sniffed. She put the larkspur 
inte the basket and went on to the sweet peas and 
snipped again, viciously. The guest followed, as did 
Isom Tnth the basket; and presently ^liss Jenny had 
done with sweet peas and she moved on again with her 
train, pausing to cut a rose here and there, and stopped 
wfore a bed where tulips lifted their bright inverted 
bells. She and Isom had guessed happily this time ; the 
various colors formed an orderly pattern. 

67 



“When we dug ’em up last fall,” she told her guest, 
“I’d put a red one in Isom’s right hand and a yellow 
one in his left. Then I’d say, ‘All right, Isom, give me 
the red one.’ He’d never fail to hold out his left hand, 
and if I just looked at him long enough, he’d hold out 
both hands. ‘Didn’t I tell you to hold that red one in 
your right hand.^’ I’d say. ‘Yessum, here ’tis,’ and out 
would come his left hand again. ‘That ain’t your right 
hand, stupid,’ I’d say. ‘Dat’s de one you said wuz my 
right hand a w’hile ago,’ Isom says. Ain’t that so, 
nigger?” Miss Jenny glared at Isom, who again per- 
formed his deprecatory effacing movement behind the 
slow equanimity of his grin. 

“Yessum, I ’speck it is.” 

“You’d better,” Miss Jenny rejoined warningly. 
“Now, how can anybody have a decent garden, with a 
fool like that? I expect every spring to find corn or 
lespedeza coming up in the hyacinth beds or some- 
thing.” She examined the tulips again, weighing the 
balanced colors one against the other in her mind. 
“No, you don’t want any tulips,” she decided, moving 

on. 

“No, Miss Jenny,” the guest agreed demurely. They 
went on to the gate, and Miss Jenny stopped and took 
the basket from Isom. 

“And you go home and take that thing off, you 

hear?” 

“Yessum.” 

“And I want to look out that window in a few min- 
utes and see you in the garden with that hoe again, 
she added. “And I want to see both of your hands on it 
this time, and I want to see it moving, too. You hear 

me?” 

“Yessum.” 


58 


“And tell Cospey to be ready to go to work in the 
morning. Even niggers that eat here have got to work 
some.” But Isom was gone, and they went on and 
mounted to the veranda. “Don’t he sound like that’s 
exactly what he’s going to do?” she confided as they 
entered the hall. “He knows as well as I do that I won’t 
dare look out that window, after what I said. Come in,” 
she added, opening the parlor doors. 

This room was open but seldom now^ though in John 

Sartoris* day it had been constantly in use. He was 

always ^ving dinners, and balls too on occasion, with 

the folding doors between it and the dining-room thrown 

open and three negroes with stringed instruments on 

the stairway and all the candles burning, surrounding 

himself with a pageantry of color and scent and music 

against which he moved with his bluff and jovial 

arrogance. He lay also overnight in this room in his 

gray regimentals and so brought to a conclusion the 

colorful, if not always untarnished, pageant of his own 

career, contemplating for the last time his own 

apotheosis from the jocund mellowness of his generous 
hearth. 

But during his son’s time it fell less and less into use, 
and slowly and imperceptibly it lost its jovial but 
stately masculinity, becoming by mutual agreement a 
place for his wife and his son John’s wife and Miss 
Jenny to clean thoroughly twdce a year and in which, 
preceded by a ritualistic unswaddling of broivn hol- 
land, they entertained their more formal callers. This 
was ita status at the birth of his grandsons and it con- 
tinued thus until the death of their parents, and later, 

.. After that Miss Jenny bothered 

with formal callers but little and with the parlor not at 
All. She said it gave her the creeps. 

69 



And so it sta^'ed closed nearly all the time, and 
slowlj' acquired an atmosphere of solemn and macabre 
fustiness. Occasionally’ young Bayard or John would 
open the door and peer into the solemn obscurity in 
which the shrouded furniture loomed with a sort of 
ghostly benignance, like albino mastodons. But they 
did not enter; already in their minds the room was 
associated with death, an idea which even the holly 
and tinsel of Christmastide could not completely 
obscure. They were away at school by the time they 
reached party age, but even during vacations, though 
they had filled tlie house with tlie polite bedlam of their 
contemporaries, the room w'ould be opened only on 
Christmas Eve, when the tree was set up and a fire 
lighted, and a bowl of eggnog on the table in the center 
of the hearth. And after they went to England in T6 
it was opened twice a year to be cleaned after the 
ancient ritual that even Simon had inherited from his 
forefathers, and to have the piano tuned, or when Miss 
Jenny and Narcissa spent a forenoon or afternoon 

there, but formally not at all. 

The furniture loomed shapelessly in its dun shrouds. 
The piano alone was uncovered, and Narcissa drew the 
bench out and removed her hat and dropped it beside 
her. Miss Jenny set the basket down and from the gloom 
back of the instrument she drew a straight, hard chair, 
uncovered also, and sat down and removed her felt hat 
from her trim white head. Light came through the open 
door but the windows were shuttered behind hea^ 
maroon curtains, and it served only to enhance the 
obscurity and to render more shapeless the hooded 


anonymous furniture. 

But behind these dun bulks and m all the comers 
of the room there waited, as actors stand within the 



wings beside the waiting stage, figures in crinoline and 
hooped muslin and silk ; in stocks and flowing coats, in 
gray too, with crimson sashes and sabers in gallant, 
sheathed repose; Jcb Stuart himself, perhaps, on his 
glittering garlanded bay or with his sunny hair falling 
upon fine broadcloth beneath the mistletoe and holly 
boughs of Baltimore in ’58. Miss Jenny sat with her 
uncompromising grenadier’s back and held her hat 
upon her knees and fixed herself to look on as her guest 
touched chords from the keyboard and wove them to- 
gether, and rolled the curtain back upon the scene. 

In the kitchen Caspey was having breakfast while 
Simon his father, and Blnora his sister, and Isom his 
nephew (in uniform) watched him. He had been 
Simon’s understudy in the stables, and general handy 
man about the place, doing all the work that Simon 
managed, through the specious excuse of decrepitude 
and filial gratitude, to slough on to his shoulders and 
that jyiiss Jenny could devise for him and he could not 
evade. Old Bayard also employed him in the fields occa- 
sionally, Then the draft had got him and bore him to 
France and the Saint Sulpice docks as one of a labor 
battalion, where he did what work corporals and 
sergeants managed to slough on to his unmilitary 
shoulders, and that white officers could devise for him 
and he could not evade. 

Thus all the labor about the place devolved on Simon 
and Isom. But Miss Jenny kept Isom piddling about 
the house so much of the time that Simon was soon as 
bitter against the War Lords as any professional 
Democrat. Meanwhile Caspey was working a little and 
trifling with continental life in its martial phases rather 
to his future detriment, for at lost the tumult died and 

61 


c 


the captains departed and left a vacuum filled with the 
usual bitter bickerings of Armageddon’s heirs-at-law; 
and Caspey returned to his native land a total loss, 
sociologically speaking, with a definite disinclination 
toward labor, honest or otherwise, and two honorable 
wounds incurred in a razor-hedged crap game. But 
return he did, to his father’s querulous satisfaction and 
Elnora’s and Isom’s admiration, and he now sat in the 
kitchen, telling them about the war. 

“I don’t take nothin* fum no white folks no mo’,” he 
was saying. “War done changed all dat. If us cullud 
folks is good enough ter save France fum de Germans, 
den us is good enough ter have de same rights de 
Germans is. French folks thinks so, anyhow, and ef 
America don’t, dey’s ways of learnin’ ’um. Yes, suh, 
it wuz de cullud soldier saved France and America 
bofe. Black regiments kilt mo’ Germans dan all de white 
armies put together, let ’lone unloadin’ steamboats all 
day long fer a dollar a day.” 

“War ain’t hurt dat big mouf o’ yo’n, anyhow,” 

Simon said. 

“War unloosed de black man’s mouf,” Caspey cor- 
rected. “Give him de right to talk. Kill Germans, den 
do yo’ oratin’, dey tole us. Well, us done it.” 

“How many you kilt, Unc’ Caspey.?” Isom asked 

deferentially. 

“I ain’t never bothered to count ’um up. Been times 
I kilt mo’ in one mawnin’ dan dey’s folks on dis whole 
place. One time we wuz down in de cellar of a steamboat 
tied up to de bank, and one of dese submareems come 
up and stopped, and all de white officers run up on de 
bank and hid. Us boys downstairs didn’t know dey wuz 
anything wrong ’twell folks started clambin’ down de 
ladder. We never had no guns wid us at de time, so 

62 



when we seed dem green legs cornin’ down de ladder, we 
crope up behin’ ’urn, and ez dey come down one of de 
boys would hit ’um over de haid wid a piece of 
scantlin’ and another would drag ’um outen de way and 
cut dey th’oat wid a meat-plow. Dey wuz about thirty 
of ’um. . . . Elnora, is dey any mo* of dat coffee lef’ ?” 

“Sho,” Simon murmured. Isom’s eyes popped quietly 
and Elnora lifted the coffee-pot from the stove and 
refilled Caspey’s cup. 

Caspey drank coffee for a while. 

“And another time me and a boy wuz gwine along 
a road. We got tired unloadin’ dem steamboats all day 
long, so one day de Captain’s dog-robber foun’ whar 
he kep* dese here unloaded passes and he tuck a han’ful 
of ’um, and me and him wuz on de road to town when 
a truck come along and de boy axed us did us want a 
bf’. He wuz a school boy, so he writ on three of de 
passes whenever we come to a place dat mought be 
M.P. infested, and we got along fine, ridin’ about de 
country on dat private truck, ’twell one mawnin’ we 
looked out whar de truck wuz and dey wuz a M.P. 
settin’ on it whilst de truck boy wuz tryin’ to explain 
to him. So we turned de other way and lit out walkin’. 
After dat we had to dodge de M.P. towns, ’case me 
and de other boy couldn’t write on de passes. 

“One day we wuz gwine along a road. It wuz a 
busted-up road and it didn’t look like no M.P. country. 
But dey wuz some of ’em in de las’ town we dodged, so 
we didn’t know we wuz so close to whar de fightin’ wuz 
^ne on ’twell we walked on to a bridge and come 
right on a whole regiment of Germans, swimmin’ in de 
nver. Dey seed us about de same time we seed dem 
and div under de water, and me and de other boy 
grabbed up two machine guns settin’ dar and we sot on 

63 



de bridge rail, and ev’y time a German stuck his haid 
up fer a new breaf, us shot ’im. It wuz jes’ like shootin’ 
turkles in a slough. I reckon dey wuz close to a hund’ed 
us kilt ’fo’ de machine guns run dry. Dat’s whut dey 
gimme dis fer.” He drew from his pocket a florid, 
plated medal of Porto Rican origin, and Isom came 
quietly up to see. 

“Umumuh,” Simon said. He sat with his hands on 
his knees, watching his son with rapt astonishment. 
Elnora came up also, her arms daubed with flour. 

“Whut does dey look like?” she asked. “Like folks?” 

“Dey’s big,” Caspey answered. “Sort of pink lookin’ 
and about eight foot tall. Only folks in de whole Ameri- 
can war dat could handle ’um wuz de cullud regiments.” 

Isom returned to his corner beside the woodbox. 

“Ain’t you got some gyardenin’ to do, boy?” Simon 
asked him. 

“Naw, suh,” Isom answered, his enraptured gaze still 
on his uncle. “Miss Jenny say us done caught up dis 
mawnin’.” 

“Well, don’t you come whinin’ ter me when she 
jumps on you,” Simon warned him. “Wliar’d you kill 
de nex’ lot?” he asked his son. 

“Us didn’t kill no mo’ after dat,” Caspey said. “We 
decided dat wuz enough and dat we better leave de rest 
of ’um fer de boys dat wuz gittin’ paid fer killin’ ’um. 
We went on ’twell de road played out in a field. Dey 
wuz* some ditches and ole wire fences and holes in de 
field, wid folks livin’ in ’um. De folks wuz white Amer- 
ican soldiers and dey egvised us to pick out a hole and 
stay dar fer a while, ef us wanted de peace and comfort 
of de war. So we picked us out a dry hole and moved 
in. Dey wasn’t nothin’ to do all day long but lay in de 
shade and watch de air balloons and listen to de shootin’ 

64 



about fo’ miles up de road. De boy wid me claimed it 
wuz rabbit hunters, but I knowed better. De white boys 
could write, so dey fixed up de passes and we tuck 
time about gwine to whar de army wuz and gittin’ 
grub. When de passes give out we foun* whar a French 
army wid some cannons wuz livin’ over in de woods a 
ways, so we went over whar dey wuz and et. 

“Dat went on fer a long time, ’twell one day de 
balloons wuz gone and de white boys says it wuz time 
to move again. But me and de other boy didn’t see no 
use in gwine nowhar else, so us stayed. Dat evenin’ we 
went over to whar de French army wuz fer some grub, 
but dey wuz gone too. De boy wid me says de Germans 
done caught ’um, but we didn’t know ; hadn’t hoard no 
big racket since yistiddy. So we went back to de hole. 
Dey wuzn’t no grub, so we crawled in and went to bed 
and slep’ dat night, and early de nex’ mawnin’ some- 
body come in de hole and tromped on us and woke us 
up. It wuz one of dese army upliftin’ ladies huntin’ 
^rman bayonets and belt-buckles. She say, ‘Who dat 
in here?’ and de other boy says, ‘Us shock troops.’ So 
we got out, but we hadn’t gone no piece ’fo’ here come 

a waggin-load of M.P.’s. And de passes had done give 
out.” 

Whut you do den?” Simon asked. Isom’s eyes 
bulged quietly in the gloom behind the woodbox. 

“Dey tuck us and shut us up in de jail-house fer a 
while. But de war wuz mos’ th’ough and dey needed 
hands to load dem steamboats back up, so dey sont us to 
a town name’ Bres’. ... I don’t take nothin’ offen 
no white man, M.P. er not,” Caspey stated again. “Us 
boys wuz in a room one night, shootin* dice. De bugle 
had done already played de lights out tune, but we 
wuz in de army, whar a man kin do whut he wants to 

65 



es lon^ es dey’U let ’im, so when de M.P. come along 
and says, ‘Put out dat light,’ one of de boys says, 
‘Come in here, and we’ll put yo’n out.’ Dey wuz two 
of the M.P.’s and dey kicked de do’ in and started 
shootin’, and somebody knocked de light over and we 
run. Dey foun’ one of de M.P.’s de nex* mawnin’ widout 
nothin’ to hole his collar on, and two of de boys wuz 
daid, too. But dey couldn’t fin’ who de res’ of us wuz. 
And den we come home.” 

Caspey emptied his cup. “I don’t take nothin’ ofTen 
no white man no mo’, lootenant ner captain ner M.P. 
War showed de white folks dey can’t git along widout 
de cullud man. Tromple him in de dus’, but when de 
trouble bust loose, hit’s ‘Please, suh, Mr. Cullud Man; 
right dis way whar de bugle blowin’, Mr. Cullud Man; 
you is de savior of de country.’ And now de cullud race 
gwine reap de benefits of de war, and dat soon.” 

“Sho,” murmured Simon. 

“Yes, suh. And de women, too. I got my white in 
France, and I’m gwine git it here, too.” 

“Lemme tell you somethin’, nigger,” Simon said. 
“De good Lawd done took keer of you fer a long time, 
now, but He ain’t gwine bother wid you always.” 

“Den I reckon I’ll git along widout Him,” Caspey 
retorted. He rose and stretched. “Reckon I’U go down 
to de big road and ketch a ride to town. Gimme dem 
clothes,. Isom.” 

Miss Jenny and her guest stood on the veranda when 
he passed along beside the house and crossed toward 

the drive. . . 

“There goes your gardener,” Narcissa said. Miss 

Jenny looked. . 

“That’s Caspey,” she corrected. “Now, where do 

66 



you reckon he’s headed? Town, I’ll bet a dollar,” she 
added, watching his lounging khaki back, by means of 
which he contrived to disseminate in some way a sort 
of lazy insolence. “You, Caspey !” she called. 

He slowed in passing Narcissa’s small car and ex- 
amined it with a disparagement too lazy to sneer even, 
then he slouched on. 


“You, Caspey!” Miss Jenny repeated, raising her 
voice. But he went steadily on down the drive, insolent 
and slouching and unhurried. “He heard me,” she said 
ominously. “We’ll see about this when he comes back. 
Who W61S the fool anj^ay, who thought of putting 

the same uniform with white men? Mr. 
Vardaman knew better; he told those fools at Washing- 
ton at the time it wouldn’t do. But politicians !” She 
invested the innocent word with an utter and blasting 
derogation. “If I ever get tired of associating with 
gentlefolks, I know what I’ll do : I’ll run for Congress. 

. . . Listen at me ! — tiradin’ again. I declare, at times 
I believe these Sartorises and all their possessions just 
set out to plague and worry me. Thank the Lord, I 
won’t have to associate with ’em after I’m dead. I don’t 
know where they’ll be, but no Sartoris is going to stay 
in heaven any longer than he can help.” 

The other laughed. “You seem very sure of your own 
destination. Miss Jenny.” 

“Why shouldn’t I be? Haven’t I been laying up 

crowns and harps for a long time?” She shaded her 

eyes with her hand and gazed down the drive. Caspey 

had reached the gate and he now stood beside the road, 

waiting for a wagon to pass. “Don’t you stop for him, 

you hear?” she said suddenly. . . . “Why won’t you 
stay for dinner?” 

“No,” the other answered, “I must get on home. 

67 



Aunt Sally’s not well today.” She stood for a moment 
in the sunlight, her hat and her basket of flowers on 
her arm, musing. Then with a sudden decision she drew 
a folded paper from the front of her dress. 

“Got another one, did you?” Miss Jenny asked, 
watching her. “Lemme see it.” She took the paper and 
opened it and stepped back out of the sun. Her nose 
glasses hung on a slender silk cord that rolled on to a 
spring in a small gold case pinned to her bosom. She 
snapped the cord out and set the glasses on her high- 
bridged nose. Behind them her eyes were cold and pierc- 
ing as a surgeon’s. 

The paper was a single sheet of foolscap ; it bore 
writing in a frank, open script that at first glance 
divulged no individuality whatever; a hand youthful, 
yet at the same time so blandly and neatly unsecretive 
that presently you wondered a little ; 


“You did not answer mine of 25th. I did not expect 
yop answer it yet. You will answer soon I can wait. I 
will not harm you I am square and honest you will lem 
when our ways come to gether. I do not expect you 
answer yet but you know where you make a sign. 

Miss Jenny refolded the paper with a gesture of fine 
and delicate distaste. “I’d burn this thing, if it w^n t 
the only thing we have to catch him with. I U give it to 

Bayard tonight.” ^ j- 

“No, no,” the other protested quickly, extending^her 

hand, “please don’t. Let me have it and tear it up. 
“It’s the only evidence, child— this and the other one. 


We’ll get a detective.” , i. i, 

“No, no; please! I don’t want anybody else to know 

about it. Please, Miss Jenny.” She reached her hand 


again. 


68 



“You want to keep it,” Miss Jenny accused coldly. 
“Just like a young fool woman, to be flattered by a 
thing like this.” 

“I’ll tear it up,” the other repeated. “I w’ould have 
sooner, but I wanted to tell somebody. It — it — I 
thought I wouldn’t feel so filthy, after I had shown it 
to somebody else. Let me have it, please.” 

“Fiddlesticks. Why should you feel filthy? You 
haven’t encouraged it, have you.^” 

“Please, Miss Jenny.” 

But Miss Jenny still held on to it. “Don’t be a fool,” 
she snapped. “How can this thing make you feel filthy? 
Any young woman is liable to get an anonymous letter. 
And a lot of ’em like it. We are all convinced tliat men 
feel that way about us, and we can’t help but admire 
the one that’s got the courage to tell us, no matter who 
he is.” 

“If he’d just signed his name. I wouldn’t mind who it 
was. But like this . . . Please, Miss Jenny.” 

“Don’t be a fool,” Miss Jenny repeated. “How can 
we find who it is if you destroy the evidence?” 

“I don’t w'ant to know.” Miss Jenny released the 
paper and Narcissa tore it to bits and cast them over 
the rail and rubbed her hands on her dress. “I don’t 
want to know. I want to forget all about it.” 

“Nonsense. You’re dying to know% right now, I bet 
you look at every man you pass and wonder if it’s him. 
And as long as you don’t do something about it, it’ll 

go on. Get worse, probably. You better let me tell 
Bayard.” 

“No, no. I’d hate for him to know, to think that I 
would— might have - . . It’s all right: I’ll just burn 
them up after this, without opening them.-^'T I I 
really must go.” 

r- 69 





I 


“Of course: you’ll throw ’em right into the stove,” 
Miss Jenny agreed with cold irony. Narcissa descended 
the steps and Miss Jenny came forward into the sun- 
light again, letting her glasses whip back into the case. 
“It’s your business, of course. But I’d not stand for it, 
if ’twas me. But then, I ain’t twenty -six years old. . . . 
Well, come out again when you get another one, or 
you want some more flowers.” 

“Yes, I will. Thank you for these.” 

“And let me know what you hear from Horace. 
Thank the Lord, it’s just a glass-blowing machine and 
not a war widow.” 

“Yes, I will. Good-bye.” She went on through the 
dappled shade in her straight white dress and her 
basket of flowers stippled upon it, and got in her car. 
The top was back and she put her hat on and started 
the engine. She looked back again and waved her hand. 
“Good-bye.” 

The negro had moved down the road, slowly, and 
stopped again, and he was watching her covertly as she 
approached. As she passed he looked full at her and she 
knew he was about to hail her. She opened the throttle 
and passed him with increasing speed and drove swiftly 
on to town, where she lived in a brick house among 
cedars on a hill. 

She was arranging the larkspur in a dull lemon urn 
on the piano. Aunt Sally Wyatt rocked steadily in her 
chair beside the window, clapping her feet flatly on the 
floor at each stroke. Her work-basket sat on the win- 
dow ledge between the gentle billowing of the curtains, 
her ebony walking-stick leaned beside it. 

“And you were out there two hours,” she said, and 

never saw him at all?” 


70 



“He wasn’t there,” Narcissa answered. “He’s gone 
to Memphis.” 

Aunt Sally rocked steadily. “If I was them, I’d make 
him stay there. I wouldn’t have that boy around me, 
blood or no bloodT . . . What did he go to Memphis 
for.^ I thought that aeroplane what-do-you-call-it was 
broke up.” 

“He went on business, I suppose.” 

“What business has he got in Memphis? Bayard 
Sartoris has got more sense than to turn over any 
business to that harebrained fool.” 

“I don’t know,” Narcissa answered, arranging the 
larkspur. “He’ll be back soon, I suppose. You can ask 
him then.” 

“Me ask him? I never said two words to him in his 
life. And I don’t intend to. I been used to associating 
with gentlefolks.” 

Narcissa broke some of the stems, arranging the 
blooms in a pattern. “What’s he done that a gentleman 
doesn’t do. Aunt Sally ?” 

'‘Why, jumping off water tanks and going up in 
balloons just to scare folks. You think I’d have that 
boy around me? I’d have him locked up in the insane 
asylum, if I was Bayard and Jenny.” 

He didn’t jump off the tank. He just swung off of 
it on a rope and dived into the swimming-pool. And 
it was John that went up in the balloon.” 

“That wasn’t what I heard. I heard he jumped off 
that Unk, across a whole row of freight cars and lum- 
ber^ piles, and didn’t miss the edge of the pool an inch.” 

‘‘No, he didn’t. He swung on a rope from the top of 
a house and then dived into the pool. The rope was 
tied to the tank.” 

“Well, didn’t he have to jump over a lot of lumber 

71 



and freight cars? And couldn’t he have broken his neck 
just as easy that way as jumping off the tank?” 

“Yes,” Narcissa answered. 

“There! What’d I tell you? And what was the use 
of it?” 

“I don’t know,” 

“Of course you don’t. That was the reason he did it.” 
Aunt Sally rocked triumphantly for a while. Narcissa 
put the last touches to the blue pattern of the larkspur. 
A tortoise-shell cat bunched suddenly and silently on 
tlie window beside the work-basket, with an effect as of 
sleight-of-hand. Still crouching, it blinked into the 
room for a moment, then it sank to its belly and with 
arched neck fell to grooming its shoulder with a nar- 
row pink tongue. Narcissa moved to the window and 
laid licr hand on the creature’s sleek back. 

“And then, going up in that balloon, when ” 

“That wasn’t Bayard,” Narcissa repeated. “That 
was John.” 

“That wasn’t what I heard. I heard it was the other 
one and that Bayard and Jenny were both beg- 
eincr him with tears in their eyes not to do it. I 
heard ” 

“Neither of them were there. Bayard wasn’t even 
there. It was John did it. He did it because the man 
that came with the balloon got sick. John went up in 
it so the country people wouldn’t be disappointed. I 

was there.” 

“Stood there and let him do it, did you, when you 
could ’a’ telephoned Jenny or walked across the square 
to the bank and got Bayard? You stood there and 

never opened your mouth, did 3’ou?” 

“Yes,” Narcissa answered. Stood there beside 
Horace in the slow, intent ring of country people, 

72 



watching the globe swelling and tugging at its ropes, 
watched John Sartoris in a faded flannel shirt and 
corduroy breeches while the carnival man explained the 
rip-cord and the parachute to liim ; stood there feeling 
her breath going out faster than she could draw it in 
again, and watched the thing lurch into the air witli 
John sitting on a frail trapeze bar swinging beneath it, 
with eyes she could not close; saw tlie balloon and 
people and all swirl slowly upward and then found 
herself clinging to Horace beliind the shelter of a 
wagon, trying to get her breath. 

He landed three miles away in a brier thicket and 
disengaged the parachute and regained the road and 
hailed a passing negro in a wagon. A mile from town 
they met old Bayard driving furiously in the carriage, 
and the two vehicles stopped side by side in the road 
while old Bayard in the one exhausted the accumulate 
fury of his rage and in the other his grandson sat in 
his shredded clothes, and on his scratched face that look 
of one who has gained for an instant a desire so fine 
that its escape was a purification, not a loss. 

The next day, as she was passing a store, he emerged 
with that abrupt violence which he had in common with 
his brother, pulling short up to avoid a collision with 
her. 

“Oh, ex Why, hello,” he said. Beneath the criss- 

crosses of tape his face was merry and bold and wild, 
and he wore no hat. For a moment she gazed at him 
with wide, hopeless eyes, then she clapped her hand to 
• her mouth and went swiftly on, almost running. 

Then he was gone, with his brother, shut away by 
the war €is two noisy dogs are penned in a kennel far 
away. Miss Jenny gave her news of them, of the dull, 
dutiful letters they sent home at sparse intervals ; then 

73 



he was dead — but away beyond the seas, and there was 
no body to be returned clumsily to earth, and so to her 
he seemed still to be laughing at that word as he had 
laughed at all the other mouth-sounds that stood for 
repose, who had not waited for Time and its furniture 
to teach him that the end of wnsdom is to dream high 
enough not to lose the dream in the seeking of it. 

Aunt Sally rocked steadily in her chair. 

“Well, it don’t matter w’hich one it was. One’s bad as 
the other. But I reckon it ain’t their fault, raised like 
they w’ere. Rotten spoiled, both of ’em. Lucy Sartoris 
w’ouldn’t let anybody control ’em while she lived. If 
they’d been mine, now . . She rocked on. “Beat it 
out of ’em, I would. Raising two wild Indians like that. 
But those folks, thinking there wasn’t anybody quite 
as good as a Sartoris. Even Lucy Cranston, come of as 
good people as there are in the state, acting like it was 
divine providence that let her marry one Sartoris and 
be the mother of two more. Pride, false pride.” 

She rocked steadily in her chair. Beneath Narcissa’s 
hand the cat purred with lazy arrogance. 

“It was a judgment on ’em, taking John instead of 
that other one. John at least tipped his hat to a lady on 

the street, but that other boy . . .” She rocked monot- 
onously, clapping her feet flatly against the floor. You 
better stay away from that boy. He’ll be killing you 
same as he did that poor little wife of his. 

“At least, give me benefit of clergy first. Aunt Sally,” 
Narcissa said. Beneath her hand, beneath the cat’s 
sleek hide, muscles flowed suddenly into tight knots, 
like wire, and the animal’s body seemed to elongate like 
rubber as it whipped from beneath her hand and flashed 
out of sight across the veranda. 

74 



“Oh!” Narcissa cried. Then she whirled and caught 
up Aunt Sally’s stick and ran from the room. 

“V^hat ” Aunt Sally said. “You bring my stick 

back here,” she said. She set staring at the door, hear- 
ing the swift clatter of the other’s heels in the hall and 
then on the veranda. She rose and leaned in the win- 
dow. “You bring my stick back here,” she shouted. 

Narcissa sped on across the porch and to the 
ground. In the canna bed beside the veranda the cat, 
crouching, jerked its head around and its yellow un- 
winking eyes. Narcissa rushed at it, the stick raised. 

“Put it down!” she cried. “Drop it!” For another 
second the yellow eyes glared at her, then the animal 
ducked its head and leaped away in a long fluid bound, 
the bird between its jaws. 

“Oh-h-h, damn you !” she cried. “Damn you ! 
You — you Sartoris!” And she hurled the stick after 
the final tortoise flash as the cat flicked around the 
comer of the house. 

“You get my stick and bring it right back this 
minute!” Aunt Sally shouted from the window. 

She and Miss Jenny were sitting in the dim parlor. 
The doors were ajar as usual, and young Bayard ap- 
peared suddenly between them and stood looking at her. 

“It’s Bayard,” Miss Jenny said. “Come in here and 
speak to Narcissa, sonny.” 

He said “Hello” vaguely and she turned on the 
piano bench and shrank a little against the instrument. 

“Who is it ?” he said. He came in, bringing with Him 
that leashed cold violence which she remembered. 

“It’s Narcissa,” Miss Jenny said testily. “Go on and 

speak to her and stop acting like you don’t know who 
she is.” 


76 



Narcissa gave him her hand and he stood holding it 
loosely, but he was not looking at her. She withdrew 
her hand. He looked at her again, then away, and he 
loomed above tiiein and stood rubbing his hand 
through his hair. 

“I want a drink,” he said. “I can’t find the key to 
the desk.” 

“Stop and talk to us a few minutes and you can have 
one.” 

He stood for a moment above them, then he moved 
abruptly and before Miss Jenny could speak he had 
dragged the envelope from another chair. 

“Let that alone, you Indian I” Miss Jenny exclaimed. 
She rose. “Here, take my chair, if you’re too weak to 
stand up. I’ll be back in a minute,” she added to Nar- 
cissa; “I’ll have to get my keys.” 

He sat laxly in the chair, rubbing his hand over his 
head, his gaze brooding somewhere about his booted 
feet. Narcissa sat utterly quiet, shrunk back against 
the piano. She spoke at last. 

“I am so sorry about your wife . . . John. I asked 
Miss Jenny to tell you when she ...” 

He sat rubbing his head slowly, in the brooding 

violence of his temporary repose. 

“You aren’t married yourself, are you?” he asked. 
She sat perfectly still. “Ought to try it,” he added. 
“Everybody ought to get married once, like everybody 
ought to go to one war.” 

Miss Jenny returned with the keys, and he got his 

long abrupt body erect and left them. 

“You can go on, now,” she said. “He won’t bother 

us again.” 

“No, I must go.” Narcissa rose quickly and took her 
hat from the top of the piano. 

76 



“Why, you haven’t been here any time, yet.” 

“I must go,” Narcissa repeated. Miss Jenny rose. 

“Well, if you must. I’ll cut you some flowers. Won’t 
take a minute.” 

“No, some other time ; I — have — I’ll come out soon 
and get some. Good-bye.” At the door she glanced 
swiftly down the hall; then she went on. Miss Jenny 
followed to the veranda. The other had descended the 
steps and she now went swiftly on toward her car. 

“Come back again soon,” Miss Jenny called. 

“Yes. Soon,” Narcissa answered. “Good-bye.” 

2 

Young Bayard came back from Memphis in his car. 
Memphis was seventy-five miles away and the trip had 
taken an hour and forty minutes because some of the 
road was clay country road. The car was long and low 
and gray. The four-cylinder engine had sixteen valves 
and eight spark-plugs, and the people had guaranteed 
tliat it would run eighty miles an hour, although there 
W’as a strip of paper pasted to the windshield, to which 
he paid no attention whatever, asking him in red let- 
ters not to do so for the first five hundred miles. 

He came up the drive and stopped before the house, 
where his grandfather sat with his feet on the veranda 
railing and Miss Jenny stood trim in her black dress 
beside a post. She descended the steps and examined it, 
and opened the door and got in to try the seat. Simon 
came to the door and gave it a brief, derogatory look 
and retired, and Isom appeared around the corner and 
circled the car quietly with an utter and yearning 
admiration. But old Ba3'ard just looked down at the 
long, dusty thing, his cigar in his fingers, and grunted. 

77 



“Why, it’s as comfortable as a rocking-chair,” Miss 
Jenny said. “Come here and try it,” she called to him. 
But he grunted again, and sat with his feet on the rail 
and watched young Bayard slide in under the wheel. 
The engine raced experimentally, ceased. Isom stood 
like a leashed hound beside it. Young Bayard glanced 
at him. 

“You can go next time,” he said. 

“Why can’t he go now.?” Miss Jenny said. “Jump 
in, Isom.” 

Isom jumped in, and old Bayard watched them move 
soundlessly down the drive and watched the car pass 
from sight down the valley. Presently above the trees a 
cloud of dust rose into the azure afternoon and hung 
rosily fading in the sun, and a sound as of remote 
thunder died muttering behind it. Old Bayard puffed 
his cigar again. Simon appeared again in the door and 
stood there. 

“Now whar you reckon dey gwine right here at 
suppertime?” he said. Bayard grunted, and Simon 
stood in the door, mumbling to himself. 

Twenty minutes later the car slid up the drive and 
came to a halt almost in its former tracks. In the back 
seat Isom’s face was like an open piano. Miss Jenny had 
worn no hat, and she held her hair with both hands, 
and when the car stopped she sat for a moment so. Then 
she drew a long breath. 

“I wish I smoked cigarettes,” she said, and then: “Is 
that as fast as it’ll go?” 

Isom got out and opened the door for her. She 
descended a little stiffly, but her eyes were shining and 

her dry old cheeks were flushed. 

“How fer y’all been?” Simon asked from the door. 

“We’ve been to town,” she answered proudly, and 

78 



her voice was clear as a girl’s. Town wets four miles 
away. 

One day a week later old man Falls came in to town 
and found old Bayard in his office. The office was abo 
the directors’ room. It was a large room containing a 
long table lined with chairs, and a tall cabinet where 
blank banking forms were kept, and old Bayard’s roll- 
top desk and swivel chair and a sofa on which he 
napped for an hour each noon. 

The desk, like the one at home, was cluttered with a 
variety of objects which bore no relation whatever to 
the banking business, and the mantel above the fire- 
place bore still more objects of an agricultural nature, 
as well as a dusty assortment of pipes and three or four 
jars of tobacco which furnished solace for the entire 
banking force from president to janitor and for a re- 
spectable portion of the bank’s clientele. Weather per- 
mitting, old Bayard spent most of the day in a tilted 
chair in the street door, and when these patrons found 
him there, they went on back to the office and filled 
their pipes from the jars. It was a sort of unspoken 
convention not to take more than a pipeful at a time. 
Here old man FaUs and old Bayard retired on the old 
man’s monthly visits and shouted at one another (they 
were both deaf) for a half hour or so. You could hear 
them plainly from the street and in the adjoining store 
on either side. 

Old man Falls’ eyes were blue and innocent as a 
boy s and his first act was to open the parcel which 
®ftyard had for him and take out a plug of chewing- 
tobacco, cut off a chew and put it in hb mouth, replace 
the plug and tie the parcel neatly again. Twice a year 
the parcel contained an entire outfit of clothing, on the 
other occasions tobacco and a small sack of peppermint 

79 



candy. He would never cut the string, but always un- 
tied it with his stiff, gnarled fingers and tied it back 
again. He would not accept money. 

He sat now in his clean, faded overalls, with the 
parcel on his knees, telling Bayard about the auto- 
mobile that had passed him on the road that morning. 
Old Bayard sat quite still, watching him with his fierce 
old eyes until he had finished. 

“Are you sure who it was?” he asked. 

“Hit passed me too fast fer me to tell whether they 
was anybody in hit a-tall or not. I asked when I fetched 
towTi who ’twas. Seems like ever’body but you knows 
how fast he runs hit.” 

Old Bayard sat quietly for a time. Then he raised 
his voice. 

“Byron.” 

The door opened and the bookkeeper entered. 

“Yes, sir. Colonel,” he said without inflection. 

“ ’Phone out to my house and tell my grandson not 
to touch that car until I come home.” 

“Yes, sir. Colonel.” And he was gone as silently as 

he appeared. 

Bayard slammed around in his swivel chair again 
and old man Falls leaned forward, peering at his face. 
“What’s that ’ere wen you got on yo’ face, Bayard?” 

he asked. 

“What?” Bayard demanded, then he raised his hand 
to a small spot which the suffusion of his face had 
brought into relief. “Here? I don’t know what it is. 

It’s been there about a week. Why?” 

“Is it gittin’ bigger?” the other asked. He rose and 
laid his parcel down and extended his hand. Old Bayard 

drew his head back. ^ „ -r, . 

“It’s nothing,” he said testily. “Let it alone. But 

80 


old man Falls put the other’s hand aside and touched 
the spot with his fingers. 

“H’m,” he said. “Hard’s a rock. Hit’ll git bigger, 
too. I’ll watch hit, and when hit’s right, I’ll take it off. 
’Tain’t ripe, yit.” The bookkeeper appeared suddenly 
and without noise beside them. 

“Yo’ cook says him and Miss Jenny is off car-ridin 
somewheres. I left yo’ message.” 

“Jenny’s with him, you say.^” old Bayard asked. 

“That’s what yo’ cook says,” the bookkeeper re- 
peated in his inflectionless voice. 

“Well. All right.” 

The bookkeeper withdrew and old man Falls picked 
up his parcel. “I’ll be gittin’ on too,” he said. “I’ll come 
in next w*eek and take a look at it. You bettor let hit 
alone till I git back.” He followed tlie bookkeeper 
from the room, and presently old Bayard rose and 
stalked through the lobby and tilted his chair in the 
door. 

That afternoon when he arrived home, the car was 
not in sight nor did his aunt answer his call. He 
mounted to his room and put on his riding-boots and 
lit a cigar, but when he looked down from his window 
into the back yard, neither Isom nor the saddled mare 
was visible. The old setter sat looking up at his window. 
When old Bayard’s head appeared there the dog rose 
and went to the kitchen door and stood there; then it 
looked up at his w'indow again. Old Bayard tramped 
down the stairs and on through the house and entered 
the kitchen, where Caspey sat at the table, eating and 
talking to Isom and Elnora. 

And one mo’ time me and another boy ” 

Caspey was saying. Then Isom saw Bayard, and rose 
from his seat in the woodbox comer, and his eyes 

81 



rolled whitely in his bullet head. Clnora paused also 
with her broom, but Caspey turned his head without 
rising, and still chew’ing steadily, he blinked his eyes 
at old Bayard in the door. 

“I sent you word a week ago to come on out here 
at once, or not to come at all,” Bayard said. “Did you 
get it?” Caspey mumbled something, still chewing, and 
old Bayard came into the room. “Get up from there 
and saddle my horse.” 

Caspey turned his back deliberately and raised his 
glass of buttermilk. “Git on, Caspey !” Elnora hissed 
at him. 

“I ain’t workin’ here,” he answered, just beneath 
Bayard’s deafness. He turned to Isom. “Whyn’t you 
go’n git his hoss fer him? Ain’t you workin* here?” 

“Caspey, fer Lawd’s sake!” Elnora implored. “Yes, 
suh, Cunnel; he’s gwine,” she said loudly. 

“Who, me?” Caspey said. “Does I look like it?” He 
raised the glass steadily to his mouth ; then Bayard . 
moved again and Caspey lost his nerve and rose quickly 
before the other reached him, and crossed the kitchen 
toward the door, but with sullen insolence in the very 
shape of his back. As he fumbled with the door Bayard 
overtook him. 

“Are you going to saddle that mare?” he demanded. 

“Ain’t gwine skip it, big boy,” Caspey answered, just 
below Bayard’s deafness. 

“What?” 

“Oh, Lawd, Caspey !” Elnora moaned. Isom crouched 
into his corner. Caspey raised his eyes swiftly to Bay- 
ard’s face and opened the screen door. 

“I says, I ain’t gwine skip it,” he repeated, raising 
his voice. Simon stood at the foot of the steps beside the 
setter, gaping his toothless mouth at them, and old 

82 


Bayard reached a stick of stove wood from the box at 
his han4 and knocked Caspey through the opening door 
and down the steps at his father’s feet. 

“Now, you go saddle that mare,” he said. 

Simon helped his son to rise and led him away toward 
the bam while the setter looked after them, gravely 
interested. “I kep’ tellin’ you dem new-fangled war 
notions of yo’n wa’n’t gwine ter work on dis place,” 
he said angrily. “And you better thank de good Lawd 
fer makin’ yo’ haid hard ez hit is. You go’n git dat 
mare, and save dat nigger freedom talk fer town-folks: 
dey mought stomach it. Whut us niggers want ter be 
free fer, anyhow? Ain’t we got ez many white folks 
now ez we kin suppo’t?” 

That night at supper, old Bayard looked at his 
grandson across the roast of mutton. “Will Falls told 
me you passed him on the poorhouse hill today run- 
ning forty miles an hour.” 

“Forty fiddlesticks,” Miss Jenny answered promptly. 
“It was fifty-four. I was watching the — what do you 
call it, Bayard? — speedometer.” 

^ Old Bayard sat with his head bent a little, watching 
his hands trembling on the carving knife and fork; 
hearing beneath the napkin tucked into his waistcoat, 
his heart a little too light and a little too fast; feeling 
Miss Jenny’s eyes upon his face. 

“Bayard,” she said sharply, “what’s that on your 

cheek? He rose so suddenly that his chair tipped over 

backward with a crash, and he tramped blindly from 
the room. 


83 



s 


“I know what you want me to do,” Miss Jenny told 
old Bayard across her newspaper. “You want me to let 
my housekeeping go to the dogs and spend all my time 
in that car, that’s what you want. Well, I’m not going 
to do it. I don’t mind riding with him now and then, 
but I’ve got too much to do with my time to spend it 
keeping liim from running that car too fast. Neck, too,” 
she added. She rattled the paper crisply. 

She said: “Besides, you ain’t foolish enough to be- 
lieve he’ll drive slow just because there’s somebody with 
him, are you.^ If you do think so, you’d better send 
Simon along. Lord knows Simon can spare the time. 
Since you quit using the carriage, if he does anything 
at all, I don’t know it.” She read the paper again. 

Old Bayard’s cigar smoked in his still hand. 

“I might send Isom,” he said. 

INIiss Jenny’s paper rattled sharply and she stared 
at lier nepliew for a long moment. “God in heaven, man, 
why don’t you put a block and chain on him and have 

done with it?” 

“Well, didn’t you suggest sending Simon with him, 
yourself? Simon has his work to do, but all Isom ever 
does is saddle my horse once a day, and I can do that 

myself.” , 

“I was trying to be ironical,” Miss Jenny said. “God 
knows, I should have learned better by this time. But 
Sf you’ve got to invent something new for the niggers 
to do, you let it be Simon. I need Isom to keep a roof 
over your head and something to eat on the table.” She 
rattled the paper. “Wliy don’t you come right out and 
tell him not to drive fast? A man that has to spend 
eight hours a day sitting in a chair in that bank door 

84 



ought not to have to spend the rest of the afternoon 
helling around the country in an automobile if he don’t 
want to.” 

“Do you think it would do any good to ask him? 
There never was a damned one of ’em yet ever paid 
any attention to my wdshes.” 

“Ask, the devil,” Miss Jenny said. “Who said any- 
thing about ask? Tell him not to. Tell him that if you 
hear again of his going fast in it, that you’ll frail the 
life out of him. I believe anyway that you like to ride 
in that car, only you won’t admit it, and you just don’t 
want him to ride in it when you can’t go too.” But old 
Bayard had slammed his feet to the floor and risen, 
and he tramped from the room. 

Instead of mounting the stairs, however. Miss Jenny 
heard his footsteps die away down the hall, and 
presently she rose and followed to the back porch, 
where he stood in the darkness there. The night was 
dark, myriad with drifting odors of the spring, and 
with insects. Dark upon lesser dark, the barn loomed 
against the sky. 

“He hasn’t come in yet,” she said impatiently, touch- 
his arm. could have told you. Go on up and go to 
bed, now; don’t you know he’ll let you know when he 
comes in? You’re going to think him into a ditch some- 
where, with these fool notions of yours.” Then, more 
gently: “You’re too childish about that car. It’s no 
more dangerous at night than it is in daytime. Come 
on, now.” 

He shook her hand off, but he turned obediently and 
entered the house. This time he mounted the stairs and 
she could hear him in his bedroom, thumping about. 
Presently he ceased slamming doors and drawers and 
lay beneath the reading-lamp with his Dumas. After a 

85 



time the door opened and young Bayard entered and 
came into the radius of the light with his bleak eyes. 

His grandfather did not remark his presence and he 
touched his arm. Old Bayard looked up, and when he 
did so young Bayard turned and quitted the room. 

After the shades on the bank windows were drawn at 
three o’clock old Bayard retired to the office. Inside 
the grille the cashier and the bookkeeper could hear him 
clattering and banging around beyond the door. The 
cashier paused, a stack of silver clipped neatly in his 
fingers. 

“Hear ’im.^” he said. “Something on his mind here, 
lately. Used to be he was quiet as a mouse back there 
until they come for him, but last few days he tromples 
and thumps around back there like he was fighting 
hornets.” 

The bookkeeper said nothing. The cashier set the 
stack of silver aside, built up another one. 

“Something on his mind lately. That examiner must 
’a’ put a bug in his ear, I reckon.” 

The bookkeeper said nothing. He swung the adding- 
machine to his desk and clicked the lever over. In the 
back room old Bayard moved audibly about. The 
cashier stacked the remaining silver neatly and rolled 
a cigarette. The bookkeeper bent above the steady click- 
ing of the machine, and the cashier sealed his cigarette 
and lit it and waddled to the window and lifted the 

curtain. . . 

“Simon’s brought the carriage, today,’ he said. 
“That boy finally wrecked that car, I reckon. Better 

call Colonel.” 

The bookkeeper slid from his stool and went back to 

86 



the door and opened it. Old Bayard glanced up from 
his desk, with his hat on. 

“All right, Byron,” he said. The bookkeeper re- 
turned to his desk. 

Old Bayard stalked through the bank and opened 
the street door and stopped utterly, the doorknob in 
his hand. 

“Where’s Bayard?” he said. 

“He ain’t cornin’,” Simon answered. Old Bayard 
crossed to the carriage. 

“What.^ Where is he?” 

“Him en Isom off somewhar in dat cyar,” Simon said. 
“Lawd knows whar dey is by now. Takin’ dat boy 
away fum his work in de middle of de day, cyar-ridin*.” 
Old Bayard laid his hand on the stanchion, the spot on 
his face coming again into white relief. “Atter all de 
time I spent tryin’ to git some sense inter Isom’s haid,” 
Simon continued. He held the horses’ heads up, waiting 
for his employer to enter. “Cyar-ridin’,” he said. 
“Cyar-ridin’.” 

Old Bayard got in and sank heavily into the seat. 

“I’ll be damned,” he said, “if I haven’t got the 
triflingest set of folks to make a living for God ever 
made. There’s one thing about it : when I finally have to 
go to the poorhouse, every damned one of you’ll be 
there when I come.” 

“Now, here you quoilin’ too,” Simon said, “Miss 
Jenny yellin’ at me twell I wuz plum out de gate, and 
now you already started at dis en’. But ef Mist’ Bayard 
don’t leave dat boy alone, he ain’t gwine ter be no 
better’n a town nigger spite of all I kin do.” 

“Jenny’s already ruined him,” old Bayard said. 
“Even Bayard can’t hurt him much.” 

87 



“You sho’ tole de troof den,” Simon agreed. He shook 
the reins. “Come up, dar.” 

“Here, Simon,” old Bayard said. “Hold up a min- 
ute.” 

Simon reined the horses back. “Whut you want 
now?” 

The spot on old Bayard’s cheek had resumed its 
normal appearance. 

“Go back to my office and get me a cigar out of that 
jar on the mantel,” he said. 

Two days later, as he and Simon tooled sedately 
homeward through the afternoon, simultaneously 
almost with tlie warning thunder of it, the car burst 
upon him on a curve, slewed into the ditch and on to 
the road again and rushed on, and in the flashing in- 
stant he and Simon saw the whites of Isom’s eyes and 
the ivory crop]>ing of his teeth behind the steering- 
wheel. When the car returned home that afternoon 
Simon conducted Isom to the bam and whipped him 
with a harness strap. 

That night they sat in the office after supper. Old 
Bayard held his cigar unlighted in his fingers. Miss 
Jenny read the paper. Faint airs blew in, laden with 


spring. 

Suddenly old Bayard said, “Maybe he’ll get tired of 
it after a while.” 

Miss Jenny raised her head. “And when he does, 
don’t you know what he’ll get then? — when he finds 
that car won’t go fast enough?” she demanded, 
at him across the paper. He sat with his 
cigar, his head bent a little, not looking at her. He 11 
buy an aeroplane.” She rattled the paper, turned the 
page. “He ought to have a wife,” she added, reading 
again. “Let him get a son, then he can break his neck 

88 



as soon and as often as he pleases. Providence doesn’t 
seem to have any judgment at all,” she said, thinking 
of the two of them, of his dead brother. She said: 
“But Lord knows, I’d hate to see any girl I was fond 
of married to him.” She rattled the paper again, turned 
another page, “I don’t know what else you expect of 
him. Of any Sartoris. You don’t waste your afternoons 
riding with him just because you think it’ll keep him 
from turning that car over. You go because when it 
does happen, you want to be in it, too. So do you think 
you’ve got any more consideration for folks than he 
has?” 

He held his cigar, his face still averted. Miss Jenny 
was watching him again across the paper. 

“I’m coming down town in the morning and we’re 
going and have the doctor look at that bump on your 
face, you hear?” 

In his room, as he removed his collar and tie before 
his chest of drawers, his eye fell upon the pipe which 
he had laid there four weeks ago, and he put the collar 
and tie down and picked up the pipe and held it in 
his hand, rubbing the charred bowl slowly with his 
thumb. 

Then with sudden decision he quitted the room and 
tramped down the hall, at the end of which a stair 
mounted into the darkness. He fumbled the light switch 
beside it and mounted, following the cramped turnings 
cautiously in the dark, to a door set at a difficult angle, 
and opened it upon a broad, low room with a pitched 
ceiling, smelling of dust and silence and ancient dis- 
used things. 

, The room was cluttered with indiscriminate furni- 
ture — chairs and sofas like patient ghosts holding 

89 



lightly in dry and rigid embrace yet other ghosts — a 
fitting place for dead Sartorises to gather and speak 
among themselves of glamorous and old disastrous 
days. The unshaded light swung on a single cord from 
the center of the ceiling. He unknotted it and drew it 
across to a nail in the wall above a cedar chest and 
fastened it here, and drew a chair to the chest and sat 
dowTi. 

The chest had not been opened since 1901, when his 
son John had succumbed to yellow fever and an old 
Spanish bullet-wound. There had been two occasions 
since, in July and in October of last year, but the other 
grandson still possessed quickness and all the incalcu- 
lable portent of his heritage. So he had forborne for 
the time being, expecting to be able to kill two birds 

with one stone, as it were. 

The lock was stiff, and he struggled patiently with 
it for some time. Rust shaled off, rubbed off onto his 
hands, and he desisted and rose and rummaged about 
and returned to the chest with a heavy, cast-iron 
candlestick and hammered the lock free and removed 
it and raised the lid. From the chest there rose a thin 
exhilarating odor of cedar, and something else: a scent 
drily and muskily nostalgic, as of old ashes. The first 
object was a garment. The brocade was richly hushed, 
and the fall of fine Mechlin was dustily yellow, pale 
and textureless as February sunlight. He lifted the 
garment carefully out. The lace cascaded mellow and 
pale as' spilled wine upon his hands, and he laid it aside 
and lifted out next a rapier. It was a Toledo, a blade 
delicate and fine as the prolonged stroke of a violin 
bow, in a velvet sheath. The sheath was elegant and 
flamboyant and soiled, and the seams had cracked 

drily. 


90 



Old Bayard held the rapier upon his hands for a 
while, feeling the balance of it. It was just such an 
implement as a Sartoris would consider the proper 
equipment for raising tobacco in a virgin wilderness, 
it and the scarlet heels and the ruffled wristbands in 
which he broke the earth and fought his stealthy and 
simple neiglibors. 

He laid it aside. Next came a heavy cavalry saber, 
and a rosewood case containing two dueling pistols 
with silver mountings and the lean, deceptive delicacy 
of race-horses, and what old man Falls had called “that 
’ere dang der’nger.” It was a stubby, evil-looking 
thing with its three barrels, viciously and coldly utili- 
tarian, and between the other two weapons it lay like 
a cold and deadly insect between two flowers. 

He removed next the blue army forage-cap of the 
’forties and a small pottery vessel and a Mexican 
machete, and a long-necked oil-can such as locomotive 
drivers use. It was of silver, and engraved upon it w'as 
the picture of a locomotive with a huge bell-shaped 
funnel and surrounded by an ornate w'reath. Beneath 
it, the name “Virginia” and the date “August 9, 1873.” 

He put these aside and with sudden purposefulness 
he removed the other objects — a frogged and braided 
coat of Confederate gray and a gowTi of sprigged 
muslin scented faintly of lavender and evocative of old 
formal minuets and drifting honeysuckle among 
steady candle-flames — and came upon a conglomera- 
tion of yellowed papers neatly bound in packets, and 
at last upon a huge, brass-bound Bible. He lifted this 
to the edge of the chest and opened it. The paper was 
brown and mellow with years, and it had a texture like 
that of slightly moist wood-ashes, as though each page 
were held intact by its archaic and fading print. He 

91 



turned the pages carefully back to the fly-leaves. 
Beginning near the bottom of the flnal blank page a 
column of names and dates rose in stark and fading 
simplicity, growing fainter and fainter where time had 
lain upon them. At the top they were still legible, as 
they were at the foot of the preceding page. But half- 
w’ay up this page they ceased, and from there on the 
sheet w’as blank save for the faint, soft mottlings of 
time and an occasional brownish pen-stroke. 

Old Ba3’ard sat for a long time, regarding the stark 
dissolving apotlieosis of his name. Sartorlses had de- 
rided Time, but Time was not vindictive, being longer 
than Sartorises. And probably unaware of them. But 
it was a good gesture, anyway. 

“In the nineteenth century,” John Sartoris said, 
“genealogy is poppycock. Particularly in America, 
where onl^' what a man takes and keeps has any sig- 
nificance and where all of us have a common ancestry 
and the only house from which we can claim descent 
with any assurance is the Old Bailey. Yet the man who 
professes to care nothing about his forbears is only 
a little less vain tlian the man who bases all his actions 
on blood precedent. And I reckon a Sartoris can have 
a little vanity and poppycock, if he wants it” 

Yes, it was a good gesture, and old Bayard sat and 
mused quietly on the tense he had unwittingly used. 
Was. Fatality; the augury of a man’s destiny peeping 
out at him from the roadside hedge, if he but rec^- 
nize it, and again he ran panting through undergro^h 
while the fading thunder of the smoke-colored stallion 
swept on in the dusk and the Yankee patrol crash^ 
behind him, crashed fainter and fainter^ until he 
crouched with spent, laboring lungs in a bner thicket 
and heard the pursuit rush on. Then he crawled forth 

9 ^ 


and went to a spring he knew that flowed from the roots 
of a beech, and as he leaned down to it the final light of 
day was reflected on to his face, bringing into sharp 
relief forehead and nose above the cavernous sockets 
of his eyes and the panting snarl of his teeth, and from 
the still water there stared back at him, for a sudden 
moment, a skull. 

The unturned corners of man’s destiny. Well, heaven, 
that crowded place, lay just beyond one of them, they 
claimed; heaven filled with every man’s illusion of him- 
self and with the conflicting illusions of him that parade 
through the minds of other illusions. . . . He stirred 
and sighed quietly, and took out his fountain pen. At 
the foot of the column he wrote : 

“John Sartoris. July 5, 1918.” 
and beneath that: 

“Caroline White Sartoris and son. October 27, 1918.” 

When the ink was dry he closed the book and re- 
placed it and took the pipe from his pocket and put 
it in the rosewood case with the dueling pistols and the 
derringer and replaced the other things and closed the 
chest and locked it. 


Miss Jenny found old Bayard in his tilted chair in 
the bank door. He looked up at her with a fine assump- 
tion of surprise and his deafness seemed more pr^ 
ounced than usual. But she got him up with cold im- 
placability and led him, still grumbling, down the 

I °thers spoke to her as to 

They turned presently and mounted a narrow stair- 

93 



way debouching between two stores, beneath an array 
of dingy professional signs. At the top was a dark 
corridor with doors, the nearest of pine, its gray paint 
scarred at the bottom as though it had been kicked 
repeatedly at the same height and with the same force. 
In the door itself two holes an inch apart bore mute 
witness to the missing hasp, and from a staple in the 
jamb depended the hasp itself, fixed there by a huge, 
rusty lock of an ancient pattern. Bayard offered to 
stop here, but Miss Jenny led him firmly on to a door 
across the hall. 

This door was freshly painted and grained to repre- 
sent walnut. Into the top half of it was let a pane of 
thick, opaque glass bearing a name in raised gilt let- 
ters, and two embracing office hours. Aliss Jenny 
opened this door and Bayard followed her into a small 
cubbyhole of a room of Spartan but suave asepsis. The 
walls were an immaculate new gray, with a reproduc- 
tion of a Corot and two spidery dry-points in narrow 
frames, and it contained a new rug in warm buff tones 
and a bare table and four chairs in fumed oak — all im- 
personal and clean and inexpensive, but revealing at 
a glance the proprietor’s soul ; a soul hampered now 
by material strictures, but destined and determined 
some day to function amid Persian rugs and mahogany 
or teak, and a single irreproachable print on the chaste 
walls. A young woman in a starched white dress rose 
from 0 , smaller table on which a telephone sat, and 

patted her hair. ^ 

“Good morning, Alyrtle,” Miss Jenny said. TeU 

Dr. Alford we’d like to see him, please.” 

“You have an appointment?” the girl asked in a 

voice without any inflection at all. 

“We’ll make one now, then,” Miss Jenny replied. 

94 



“You don’t mean to say Dr. Alford don’t come to work 
before ten o’clock, do you?” 

“Dr. Alford don’t — ^loesn’t see any one without an 
appointment,” the girl parroted, gazing at a point 
above Miss Jenny’s head. “If you have no appoint- 
ment, you’ll have to have an ap ” 

“Tut, tut,” Miss Jenny interrupted briskly. “You 
run and tell Dr. Alford Colonel Sartoris wants to see 
him, there’s a good girl.” 

**Yessum, Miss Jenny,” the girl said obediently and 
she crossed the room, but at the other door she paused 
again, and again her voice became parrot-like. “Won’t 
you sit down? I’ll see if the doctor is engaged.” 

*You go and tell Dr. Alford we’re here,” Miss 
Jenny repeated affably. *‘Tell him I’ve got some shop- 
ping to do this morning and I haven’t got time to 
wait.” 


Yessum, Miss Jenny,” the girl agreed, and disap- 
peared, and after a dignified interval she returned, 
once ™re clothed faultlessly in her professional man- 

in, please.” 

&he held the door open and stood aside. 

“Thank you, honey,” Miss Jenny replied. “Is your 
mamma still in bed?” 


sitting up now, thank you.” 
ard ” * good,” Miss Jenny agreed. “Come on, Bay- 

This was smaller than the other, and brutally 
Mrbohzed. There was a white enameled cabinet filled 
wlh VICIOUS mckel gleams, and a metal operating-table 

elMtric furnaces and ovens and steril- 

S J bent over a 

small desk, and for a while he proffered them his sleek 

obhvious head. Then he glanced up, and rose. 




He was in the youthful indeterminate thirties, a 
newcomer to tlie town and nephew of an old resident. 
He had made a fine record in medical school and was 
of a personable exterior, but there was a sort of pre- 
occupied dignity, a sort of erudite and cold unillusion 
regarding mankind, about him that precluded the easy 
intimacy of the small town and caused even those who 
remembered him as a visiting boy to address him as 
Doctor or Mister. He had a small mustache and a face 
like a mask — a comforting face, but cold; and while 
old Bayard sat restively the doctor probed delicately 
with dry, scrubbed fingers at the wen on his face. Miss 
Jenny asked him a question, but he continued his ex- 
ploration raptly, as though he had not heard, as though 
she had not even spoken ; inserting a small electric bulb, 
which he first sterilized, into Bayard’s mouth and 
snapping its ruby glow on and off within his cheek. 
Then he removed it and sterilized it again and returned 
it to the cabinet. 

“Well?” Miss Jenny said impatiently. The doctor 
shut the cabinet carefully and washed and dried his 
hands and came and stood above them, and with his 
thumbs hooked in his jacket pockets he became sol- 
emnly and unctuously technical, rolling the harsh words 
upon his tongue with epicurean deliberation. 

“It should be removed at once,” he concluded. “It 
should be removed while in its early stage; that is why 

I advise an immediate operation.” 

“You mean, it might develop into cancer?” Miss 


Jenny asked. . 

“No question about it at all, madam. Course of time. 

Neglect it, and I can promise you nothing ; have it out 
now, and he need never worry about it again.” He 
looked at old Bayard again with lingering and chill 


96 



contemplation. “It will be very simple. I’ll remove it 
as easily as that.” And he made a short gesture with 
his hand. 


“What’s that?” Bayard demanded. 

*T say, I can take that growth off so easily you won’t 
know it, Colonel Sartoris.” 

*‘I’ll be damned if you do !” Bayard rose with one 
of his characteristic plunging movements. 

“Sit down, Bayard,” Miss Jenny ordered. “Nobody’s 
going to cut on you without your knowing it. — Should 
it be done right away?” she asked. 

Yes, ma’am. I wouldn’t have that thing on my face 
overnight Otherwise, it is only fair to warn you that 
no doctor can assume responsibility for what might 
ensue. ... I could remove it in two minutes,” he 
added, looking at Bayard’s face again with cold specu- 
lation. Then he half turned his head and stood in a 
listening attitude, and beyond the thin walls a voice 
in the other room boomed in rich, rolling waves 

‘‘Mawnin’, sister,” it said. “Didn’t I hear Bayard 
Sai^ns cussin’ m here.?” The doctor and Miss Jenny 
held their arrested attitudes; then the door opened and 
the fattest man in the whole county filled it. He wore a 
shiny alpaca coat over waistcoat and trousers of baijffv 
black broadcloth ; above a plaited shirt the fatty rolls 
of his dewlap practically hid his low collar and a black 
string tie. His Roman senator’s head was thAtched with 
a vigorous curling of silvery hair. “What the devil’s 

Ihe r fiu! «dled into 

and ^"urnilhfnj."'"'’ 

This was Doctor Lucius Quintus Peabody, eiehtv- 

Vouldr^nd hundred and Jn 

pounds and possessing a digestive tract like a horse 

97 



He had practiced medicine in the county when a doc- 
tor’s equipment consisted of a saw and a gallon of 
whisky and a satchel of calomel; he had been John 
Sartoris’ regimental surgeon, and up to the day of the 
automobile he would start out at any hour of the 
twenty-four in any weather and for any distance, over 
practically impassable roads in a lopsided buckboard, 
to visit any one, white or black, who sent for him, ac- 
cepting for fee usually a meal of corn pone and coffee, 
or perhaps a small measure of corn or fruit, or a few 
flower bulbs or graftings. 

When he was young and hasty he had kept a day- 
book, kept it meticulously until these hypothetical 
assets totaled $10,000. But that was forty years ago, 
and since then he hadn’t bothered with a record at all ; 
and now from time to time a countryman enters his 
shabby office and discharges an obligation, commemo- 
rating sometimes the payer’s entry into the world, in- 
curred by his father or grandfather, which Doctor 
Peabody himself had long since forgotten about. Every 
one in the county knew him and sent him hams and 
wild game at Christmas, and it was said that he could 
spend the balance of his days driving about the county 
in the buckboard he still used, with never a thought 
for board and lodging and without the expenditure of 
a penny for either. He filled the room with his bluff 
and hbmely humanity, and as he crossed the floor and 
patted Miss Jenny’s back with one flail-like hand, the 

whole building trembled to his tread. 

“Mawnin’, Jenny,” he said. “Havin’ Bayard meas- 
ured for insurance.^” 

“This damn butcher wants to cut on me,” old Bayard 
said querulously. “You come on and make ’em let me 

alone, Loosli.” 


98 



“Ten A.M.’s mighty early in the day to start carvin’ 
white folks,” Dr. Peabody boomed. “Nigger’s different. 
Chop up a nigger any time after midnight. What’s 
the matter with him, son?” he asked Dr. Alford. 

“I don’t believe it’s anything but a wart,” Miss* 
Jenny said, “but I’m tired of looking at it.” 

“It’s no wart,” Dr. Alford corrected stiffly. He re- 
capitulated his diagnosis in technical terms while Dr. 
Peabody enveloped them all in the rubicund benevo- 
lence of his presence. 

“Sounds pretty bad, don’t it?” he agreed, and he 

shook the floor again and pushed Bayard firmly into 

his chair with one huge hand, and with the other he 

dragged his face up to the light. Then he dug a pair 

of iron-bowed spectacles from the pocket of his coat 

and examined Bayard’s face. “Think it ought to come 
off, do you.?” 

“I do,” Dr. Alford answered coldly. “I think it is 
operative that it be removed. Unnecessary there 

“Folks got along with cancer a long time befo’ they 

invented knives,” Dr. Peabody said drily. “Hold still, 
Bayard.” ’ 


And prople like you are one of the reasons, was on 
the tip of the younger man’s tongue. But he forebore 

remove that growth in two 
minutes. Colonel Sartoris.” 


rejoiced violently, 
' ? to rise. “Get away, Loosh.” ^ 

said equably, holding him 
do^ while he probed at the wen. “Does it hurt fny.^” 

“Yoi >n m ril be damned ” 

told 1dm** «V *’“j I damned anyway,” Dr. Peabody 
Id him. You d be about as weU off dead, anyhoi^ 

99 



I don’t know anybody that gets less fun out of living 
than you do.” 

“You told the truth for once,” Miss Jenny agreed. 
“He’s the oldest person I ever knew in my hfe.” 

“And so,” Dr. Peabody continued blandly, “I 
wouldn’t worry about it. Let it stay there. Nobody 
cares what your face looks like. If you were a young 
fellow, now, out sparkin’ the gals every night ” 

“If Dr. Peabody is permitted to interfere with 
impunity ” Dr. Alford began. 

“Will Falls says he can cure it,” Bayard said. 

“With that salve of his.^” Dr. Peabody asked 
quickly. 

“Salve Dr. Alford repeated. “Colonel Sartoris, if 
you permit any quack that comes along to treat that 
growth with home-made or patent remedies, you’ll be 
dead in six months. Dr. Peabody even will bear me 
out,” he added with fine irony. 

“I don’t know,” Dr. Peabody replied slowly. “Will 
has done some curious things with that salve of his.” 

“I must protest against this,” Dr. Alford said. “Mrs. 
Du Pre, 1 protest against a member of my profession 
sanctioning, even negatively, such a procedure.” 

“Pshaw, boy,” Dr. Peabody answered, “we ain’t 
goin’ to let Will put his dope on Bayard’s wart. It’s 
all right for niggers and livestock, but Bayard don’t 
need it. We’ll just let this thing alone, long as it don’t 
hurt him.” 

“If that growth is not removed Immediately, I wash 
my hands of all responsibility,” Dr. Alford stated. “To 
neglect it will be as fatal as Mr. Falls’ salve. Mrs. Du 
Pre, I ask you to witness that this consultation has 
taken this unethical turn through no fault of mine and 
over my protest.” 


100 



“Pshaw, boy,” Dr. Peabody said again, “this ain’t 
hardly worth the trouble of cuttin’ out. We’ll save you 
an arm or a leg as soon as that fool grandson of his 
turns that automobile over with ’em. Come on with me, 
Bayard.” 

“Mrs. Du Pre ” Dr. Alford essayed. 

“Bayard can come back, if he wants to,” Dr. Pea- 
body patted the younger man’s shoulder w'ith his heavy 
hand. “I’m going to take Iiim to niy office and talk to 
him a while. Jenny can bring him back, if she wants to. 
Come on, Bayard.” And he led old Bayard from the 
room. Miss Jenny rose also. 

“That Loosh Peabody is as big a fogy as old Will 

Falls,” she said. “Old people just fret me to death. 

You wait: I’ll bring him right back here, and we’ll 

finish this business.” Dr. Alford held the door open 

for her and she sailed in a stiff, silk-clad rage from 

the room and followed her nephew across the corridor 

and. through the scarred door with its rusty lock, and 

into a room resembling a miniature cyclonic devastation 

mellowed peacefully over with dust ancient and undis- 
turbed. 


“You, Loosh Peabody,” Miss Jenny said. 

“Sit down, Jenny,” Dr. Peabody told her. “And be 
quiet. Unfasten your shirt, Bayard.” 

Bayard said belligerently. The other 
thrust him into a chair. 

“Want to see your chest,” he explained. He crossed 
to an ancient roll-top desk and rummaged through the 
dusty litter upon it. There was litter Ld dust fvery- 
where in the huge room. Its four windows gave upon 

^he S?d ‘“■'V M ‘ ranged along 

so that l square shaded these first floor offices, 

that light entered them, but tempered, like light 

"• 101 



beneath water. In the comers of the ceiling were spider 
webs thick and heavy as Spanish moss and dingy as 
old lace, and the once-white walls were an even and 
unemphatic drab save for a paler rectangle here and 
there where an outdated calender had hung and been 
removed. Besides the desk, the room contained three 
or four miscellaneous chairs in various stages of 
decrepitude, a rusty stove in a sawdust-filled box, and 
a leather sofa holding mutely amid its broken springs 
the outline of Dr. Peabody’s recumbent shape; beside 
it and slowly gathering successive layers of dust, was a 
stack of lurid, paper-covered nickel novels. This was 
Dr. Peabody’s library, and on this sofa he passed his 
office hours, reading them over and over. Other books 
there were none. 

But the waste-basket beside the desk and the desk 
itself and the mantel above the trash-filled fireplace, 
and the window-ledges too, were cluttered with circular 
mail matter and mail order catalogues and government 
bulletins of all kinds. In one corner, on an up-ended 
packing-box, sat a water cooler of stained oxidized 
glass, in another corner leaned a clump of cane fishing- 
poles warping slowly of their own weight; and on every 
horizontal surface rested a collection of objects not to 
be found outside of a second-hand store — old garments, 
bottles, a kerosene lamp, a wooden box of tins of axle 
grease, lacking one; a clock in the shape of a bland 
china morning.-glory supported by four garlanded 
maidens who had suffered sundry astonishing anatom- 
ical mishaps, and here and there among the dusty in- 
discrimination, various instruments pertaining to the 
occupant’s profession. It was one of these that Dr. Pea- 
body sought now in the littered desk on which sat a 
single photograph in a wooden frame, and though Miss 

102 



Jenny said again, “You, Loosh Peabody, you listen to 
me,” he continued to seek it with bland and unhurried 
equanimity. 

“You fasten your clothes and we*ll go back to that 
doctor,” Miss Jenny ordered lier nephew. “Neither you 
nor I can waste any more time with a doddering old 
fool.” 

“Sit down, Jenny,*’ Dr. Peabody repeated, and he 
drew out a drawer and removed from it a box of cigars 
and a handful of faded artificial trout flies and a soiled 
collar, and lastly a stethoscope; then he tumbled the 

other things back into the drawer and shut it with his 
knee. 

Miss Jenny sat trim and outraged, fuming while he 
listened to old Bayard’s heart. 

“Well,” she snapped, “does it tell you how to take 
that wart oflF his face? Will Falls didn’t need any tele- 
phone to find that out.” 


^ It tells more than that,” Dr. Peabody answered. 
‘It tells how Bayard’ll get rid of all his troubles, if 
he keeps on riding in that hellion’s automobile.” 

Fiddlesticks,” Miss Jenny said, “Bayard’s a good 
driver. I never rode with a better one.” 

It’ll take more’n a good driver to keep this” — he 
tapped Bayard’s chest with his blunt finger — “goin’, 

time that boy whirls that thing around another curve 
or two like I’ve seen him do.” 


“Did you ever hear of a Sartoris dying from a nat- 
u^l cause, like anybody else?” Miss Jenny demanded. 
, ^on t you know that heart ain’t going to Uke Bayard 
off before his time? You get up from there, and come 
on me, she added to her nephew. Bayard but- 

sat on the sofa and 

Watched hun quietly. 


103 



“Bayard,” he said suddenly, “why don’t you stay 
out of that damn thing?” 

“What?” 

“If you don’t stay out of that car, you ain’t goin’ 
to need me nor Will Falls, nor that boy in yonder with 
all his hand-boiled razors, neither.” 

“What business is it of yours?” old Bayard de- 
manded. “By God, can’t I break my neck in peace if 
I want to?” He rose. He was trembling, fumbling at 
his waistcoat buttons, and Miss Jenny rose also and 
made to help him, but he put her roughly aside. Dr. 
Peabody sat quietly, thumping his fat fingers on one 
fat knee. “I have already outlived my time,” old Bay- 
ard continued more mildly. “I am the first of my name 
to see sixty years that I know of. I reckon Old Marster 
is keeping me for a reliable witness to the extinction 
of it.” 

“Now,” Miss Jenny said icily, “you’ve made your 
speech, and Loosh Peabody has wasted tlie morning 
for you, so I reckon we can leave now and let Loosh go 
out and doctor mules for a while, and you can sit 
around the rest of the day, being a Sartoris and feeling 
sorry for yourself. Good morning, Loosh.” 

“Make him let that place alone, Jenny,” Dr. Peabody 

said. ^ . 

“Ain’t you and W^ill Falls going to cure it for him? 

“You keep him from letting Will Falls put any- 
thing on it,” Dr. Peabody repeated equably. “It’s all 

right. Just leave it alone.” 

“We’re going to a doctor, that’s what we’re going 

to do,” Miss Jenny replied. “Come on here.” 

Wlien the door had closed, he sat motionless and 
heard them quarreling beyond it. Then the sound of 
their voices moved on down the corridor toward the 

104 



stairs, and still quarreling loudly and, on old Bayard’s 
part, with profane emphasis, the voices died away. 
Then Dr. Peabody lay back on the sofa shaped already 
to the bulk of him, and with random deliberation he 
reached a nickel thriller blindly from the stack at the 
head of the couch. 

4 


As they neared the bank Narcissa Benbow came 
along from the opposite direction, and they met at the 
door, where he made her a ponderous compliment on her 
appearance while she stood in Iter pale dress and 
shouted her grave voice into his deafness. Then he took 
his tilted chair, and IVliss Jenny followed her into the 
bank and to the teller’s window. There was no one 
behind the grille at the moment save the bookkeeper. 
He looked at them briefly and covertly across his shoul- 
der, then slid from his stool and crossed to the window, 
but without raising his eyes ag^ain. 

Narcissa’s check, and while she listened to 
Miss Jenny’s recapitulation of Bayard’s and, Loosh 
Peabody’s stubborn masculine stupidity she remarked 
the reddish hair which clothed his arms down to the 
second joints of his fingers, and remarked with a faint 
ye distinct distaste, and a little curiosity since it was 
not particularly warm, the fact that his hands and 
arms were beaded with perspiration. 

Then she made her eyes blank again and took the 
notes which he pushed under the grille to her and 
opened her bag. From its blue satin maw the corner 

and some of its superscription peeped 
suddenly, but she crumpled it quickly from sight and 
put the money in and closed the bag. They turned 
away. Miss Jenny still talking, and she paused at the 

105 



door again, clothed in her still aura of quietness, while 
old Bayard twitted her heavily on imaginary affairs 
of the heart which furnished the sole theme of conver- 
sation between them, shouting serenely at him in return. 
Tlien she went on, surrounded by tranquillity like a 
visible presence or an odor or a sound. 

As long as she was in sight the bookkeeper stood at 
the window. His head was bent and his hand made a 
scries of neat, meaningless figures on the pad beneath 
it. Then she went on and passed from sight. He moved, 
and in doing so he found that the pad had adhered to 
his damp wrist, so that when he moved his arm it came 
also. Then its own weight freed it and it fell to the 
floor. 

After the bank closed that afternoon Snopes crossed 
the square and entered a street and approached a 
square frame building witu a double veranda, from 
which the mournful cacophony of a cheap talking- 
machine came upon the afternoon. He entered. The 
music came from the room to the right and as he passed 
the door he saw a man in a collarless shirt sitting in a 
chair with his sock feet on another chair, smoking a 
pipe, the evil reek of which followed him down the hall. 
Tlie hall smelled of damp, harsh soap, and the linoleum 
carpet gleamed, still wet. He followed it and ap- 
proached a sound of steady, savage activity, and came 
upon a woman in a shapeless gray garment, who 
ceased mopping and looked at him across her gray 
shoulder, sweeping her lank hair from her brow with 
a reddened forearm. 

“Evenin’, Miz Beard,” Snopes said. “Virgil come 
home yet 

“He was through here a minute ago,” she answered. 

106 



“If he ain’t out front, I reckon his paw sent him on a 
arr’nd. Mr. Beard’s takin’ one of his spells in the hip 
agin. He might ’a* sent Virgil on a arr’nd.” Her hair 
fell lankly across lier face again. Again she brushed it 
aside with a harsh gesture. “You got some mo’ work 
fer him.^” 

“Yessum. You don’t know which-a-way he went?” 

“Ef Mr. Beard ain’t sont him nowheres he mought 
be in the back yard. He don’t usually go fur away.” 
Again she dragged her lank hair aside; shaped so long 
to labor, her muscles were restive under inaction. She 
grasped the mop again. 

Snopes went on and stood on the kitchen steps above 
an enclosed space barren of grass and containing a 
chicken pen, also grassless, in which a few fowls hud- 
dled or moved about in forlorn distraction in the dust. 
On one hand was a small kitchen garden of orderly, 
tended rows. In the corner of the yard was an outhouse 
of some sort, of weathered boards, 

Virgil,” he said. The yard was desolate with ghosts ; 
ghosts of discouraged weeds, of food in the shape of 
empty tins, broken boxes and barrels; a pile of stove 
wood and a chopping-block across which lay an ax 
whose helve had been mended with rusty wire amateur- 
isUy wound. He descended the steps and the chickens 
raised a discordant clamor, anticipating food. 

“Virgil.” 

Sparrows found sustenance of some sort in the dust 
among the fowls, but the fowls themselves, perhaps 
mth a foreknowledge of frustration and of doom, hud- 
dled back and forth along the wire, discordant and 
distract, watching him with predatory, importunate 
eyes. He was about to turn and reenter the kitchen 
when the boy appeared silently and innocently from 

107 



the outhouse, with his straw-colored hair and his bland 
eyes. His mouth was pale and almost sweet, but secret- 
ive at the corners. His chin was negligible. 

“Hi, Mr. Snopes. You calling m^ ?** 

“Yes. If you ain’t doing anything special,” Snopes 
answered. 

“I ain’t,” the boy said. They entered the liouse and 
passed the room where the woman labored with drab 
fury. The reek of the pipe, the lugubrious reiteration 
of the phonograph, filled the liall, and they mounted 
stairs carpeted also with linoleum fastened to each step 
by a treacherous sheet-iron strip treated to resemble 
brass and scuffed and scarred by heavy feet. The upper 
hall was lined by two identical rows of doors. Tliey 
entered one of these. 

The room contained a bed, a chair, a dressing-table, 
and a wash-stand with a slop-jar beside it. The floor 
was covered with straw matting, frayed in places. The 
single light hung unshaded on a greenish-browTi cord. 
Upon the wall above the paper-filled fireplace a framed 
lithograph of an Indian maiden in immaculate buck- 
skin leaned her naked bosom above a formal moonlit 
pool of Italian marble. She held a guitar and a rose, 
and dusty sparrows sat on the window ledge and 
watched them brightly through the dusty screen. 

The boy entered politely. His pale eyes took in the 
room and its contents at a comprehensive glance. He 
said, “That air gun ain’t come yet, has it, Mr. 
Snopes?” 

“No, it ain’t,” Snopes answered. “It’ll be here soon, 
though.” 

“You ordered off after it a long time, now. 

“That’s right. But it’ll be here soon. Maybe they 

108 



haven’t got one in stock, right now.” He crossed to 
the dresser and took from a drawer a few slieets of 
foolscap and laid them on the dresser top and drew a 
chair up and dragged his suitcase from beneath the 
bed and set it on the chair. Then he took his fountain 
pen from his pocket and uncapped it and laid it beside 
the paper. “It ought to be here any day, now.” 

The boy seated himself on the suitcase and took up 
the pen. “They got ’em at Watts’ hardware store,” he 
suggested. 

“If the one we ordered don’t come soon, we’ll git one 
there,” Snopes said. “When did we order it, anyway?” 

“Week ago Tuesday,” the boy answered glibly. “I 
wrote it down.” 

“Well, it’ll be here soon. You ready?” 

The boy squared himself before the paper. “Yes, 
sir.” Snopes took a folded paper from tlie top pocket 
of his trousers and spread it open. 

“Code number forty-eight. Mister Joe Butler, Saint 
Louis, Missouri,” he read, then he leaned over the boy’s 
shoulder, watching the pen. “That’s right: up close* to 
the top, he commended. “Now,” Tlie boy dropped 
down the page about two indies, and as Snopes read, 
he transcribed in his neat, cojiy-book hand, pausing 
only^occosionally to inquire as to the spelling of a word. 

“ T thought once I would try to forget you. But I 
cannot forget you because you cannot forget me. I 
saw my letter in your hand satchel today. Every day 
I can put my hand out and touch you you do not know 
it. Just to see you walk down tlie street To know what 
I know what you know. Some day we will both know 
to gether when you got use to it. You kept my letter 
but you do not anser. That is a good sign you do ’ ” 

109 



The boy had reached the foot of the page. Snopes re- 
moved it, leaving the next sheet ready. He continued 
to read in his droning, infiectionless voice: 

“ ‘ not forget me you would not keep it. I think 

of you at night the way you walk down the street like 
I was dirt. I can tell you something you will be sur- 
prised I know more tlian watch you walk down the 
street with cloths. I will some day you will not be sur- 
prised then. You pass me you do not know it I know it. 
You will know it some day. Be cause I will tell you.’ 
Now,” he said, and the boy dropped on to the foot of 
the page. “ ‘Yours truly Hal Wagner. Code number 
twenty-four.’ ” Again he looked over the boy’s shoulder. 
“That’s right.” He blotted the final sheet and gathered 
it up also. The boy recapped the pen and thrust the 
chair back, and Snopes produced a small paper bag 
from his coat. 

The boy took it soberly. “Much obliged, Mr. 
Snopes,” he said. He opened it and squinted into it. 
“It’s funny that air gun don’t come on.” 

“It sure is,” Snopes agreed. “I don’t know why it 
don’t come.” 

“Maybe it got lost in the post office,” the boy sug- 
gested. 

“It may have. I reckon that’s about what happened 
to it. I’ll write ’em again, tomorrow.” 

The boy rose, but he stood yet with his straw-colored 
hair and his bland, innocent face. He took a piece of 
candy, from the sack and ate it without enthusiasm. I 
reckon I better tell papa to go to the post office and 
ask ’em if it got lost.” 

“No, I wouldn’t do that,” Snopes said quickly. “You 
wait ; I’ll ’tend to it. We’ll get it, all right.” 

“Papa wouldn’t mind. He could go over there soon s 

110 



he comes home and see about it. I could find him right 
now, and ask him to do it, I bet.” 

“He couldn’t do no good,” Snopes answered. “You 
leave it to me. I’ll get that gun, all right.” 

“I could tell him I been working for you,” the boy 
pursued. “I remember them letters.” 

“No, no, you wait and let me ’tend to it. I’ll see about 
it first thing tomorrow.” 

“All riglit, Mr. Snopes.” He ate another piece of 
candy, without enthusiasm. He moved toward the door. 
“I remember ever’ one of them letters. I bet I could 
sit down and write ’em all again. I bet I could. Say, 

Snopes, who is Hal Wagner? Hoes he live in 
Jefferson?” 

No, no. You never seen him. He don’t hardly never 
come to town. That’s the reason I’m ’tending to his 
business for him. I’ll see about that air gun, all right.”' 

The boy opened the door, then he paused again. 
“They got ’em at Watts’ hardware store. Good ones. 
I’d sure like to have one of ’em. Yes, sir, I sure would.” 

“Sure, sure,” Snopes repeated. “Ourn’ll be here to- 
morrow. You just wait; I’ll see you git that gun.” 

The boy departed. Snopes locked the door, and for 
a while he stood beside it with his head bent, his hands 
slowly knotting and writhing together. Then he took 
up the folded sheet and burned it over the hearth and 

>»eel. 

With his knife he cut the address from the top of the 
first sheet and the signature from the bottom of the 
second, and folded them and inserted them in a cheap 
envelope. He sealed this and stamped it, and took out 
his pen and with his left hand he addressed the envelope 
m labored printed characters. That night he took it 
to the station and mailed it on the train. 

Ill 



The next afternoon Virgil Beard killed a mocking- 
bird. It was singing in the peach tree that grew in the 
comer of the chicken-yard. 

5 

At times, as Simon puttered about the place during 
the day, lie could look out across the lot and into the 
pasture and see the carriage horses growing daily 
shabbier and less prideful with idleness and lack of 
their daily grooming, or he would pass the carriage 
motionless in its shed, its tongue propped at an accus- 
ing angle, and in the harness room the duster and the 
top hat gathered slow dust on the nail in the wall, 
holding too in their mute waiting a patient and ques- 
tioning uncomplaint. And at times, when he stood 
sliabby and stooped a little with stubborn bewilderment 
and age, on the veranda with its ancient roses and wis- 
taria and all its spacious and steadfast serenity, and 
watched Sartorises come and go in a machine a gentle- 
man of his day would have scorned and which any 
pauper could own and any fool would ride in, it seemed 
to him that John Sartoris stood beside him, with his 
bearded and hawkUke face and an expression of 

haughty and fine contempt. 

And as he stood so, with afternoon slanting athwart 

the 'southern end of the porch and the heady and 
myriad odors of the waxing spring and the drowsy 
humming of Insects and the singing of birds steady 
upon it, Isom within the cool doorway or at the corner 
of the house would hear his grandfather mumbling in 
a monotonous singsong in which was incomprehension 
and petulance and querulousness; and Isom would 
withdraw to the kitchen where his mother with her 

112 



placid yellow face and her endless crooning labored 
steadily. 

“Pappy out dar talkin’ to Ole Marster agin,” Isom 
told her. “Gimme dem cole ’taters, mammy.” 

“Ain’t Miss Jenny got some work fer you dis eve- 
nin’?” Elnora demanded, giving him the potatoes. 

“No’m. She gone off in de cyar agin.” 

“Hit’s de Lawd’s blessin’ you and her ain’t bofe 
gone in it, like you is whenever Mist’ Bayard’ll let 
you. You git on outen my kitchen, now. I got dis flo’ 
mopped and I don’t want it tracked up.” 

Quite often these days Isom could hear his grand- 
father talking to John Sartoris as he labored about 
the stable or the flower beds or the lawn, mumbling 
away to that arrogant shade which dominated the 
house and the life that went on there and the whole 
scene itself, across which the railroad he had built ran 
punily with distance. But distinct with miniature 
verisimilitude, as though it were a stage set for tlie 
diversion of him whose stubborn dream, flouting him 
so deviously and cunningly while the dream was impure, 
had shaped itself fine and dear, now tliat the dreamer 
wa^^ purged of the grossness of pride with that of flesli. 

Gent mun equipage,” Simon mumbled. He was busy 
again with his hoe in the salvia bed at the top of the 
drive. Ridin’ in dat thing, wid a gent’mun’s proper 
equipage goin’ ter rack en ruin in de barn.” He wasn’t 
flunking of Miss Jenny. It didn’t make much difference 
what women rode in, their menfolks permitting. They 
only showed off a gentleman’s equipage, anyhow; they 
were but the barometers of his establishment, the glass 
of his pntility: horses themselves knew it. “Yo’ own 
son, yo’ own twin grandson, ridin’ right up in yo* face 
m a contraption like dat,” he continued, “and you let- 

113 



tin’ ’um do it. You bad ez dey is. You jes’ got ter lay 
down de law ter ’um, Marse John; wid all dese foreign 
wars en sich de young folks is growed away fum de 
correck behavior; dey don’t know how ter conduck 
deyselfs in de gent’mun way. Whut you reckon folks 
gwine think when dey sees yo’ own folks ridin* in de 
same kine o’ rig trash rides in.^ You jes’ got ter resert 
yo’self, Marse John. Ain’t Sartorises sot de quality in 
dis country since befo’ de War.? And now jes’ look at 
’um.” 

He leaned on his hoe and watched the car swing up 
the drive and stop before the house. Miss Jenny and 
young Bayard got out and mounted to the veranda. 
The engine was still running; a faint shimmer of 
exhaust drifted upon the bright forenoon, and Simon 
came up with his hoe and peered at the array of dials 
and knobs on the dash. Bayard turned in the door and 
spoke his name. 

“Cut the switch off, Simon,” he ordered. 

“Cut de which whut off.?” Simon said. 

“That little bright lever by the steering-wheel there. 
Turn it down.” 

“Naw, suh,” Simon answered, backing away, “I ain’t 
gwine tech it. I ain’t gwine have it blowin’ up in my 
face.” 

“It won’t hurt you,” Bayard said impatiently. “ J ust 
put your hand on it and pull it down. That little bright 
jigger there.” 

Simon peered doubtfully at the gadgets and things, 
but without coming any nearer; then he craned his 
neck further and stared over into the car. “I don’t see 
nothin’ but dis yere big lever stickin’ up thoo de flo’. 
Dat ain’t de one you mentionin’, is hit.?” 

Bayard said “HeU.” He descended in two strides 

114 



and leaned across the door and cut the switch under 
Simon’s curious blinking regard. The purr of the 
engine cfeased. 

“Well, now,” Simon said, “is dat de one you wuz 
talkin’ erbout?” He stared at the switch for a time, 
then he straightened up and stared at the hood. “She’s 
quit b’ilin’ under dar, ain’t she? Is dat de way you 
stops her?” But Bayard had mounted the steps again 
and entered the house. 

Simon lingered a while longer, examining the gleam- 
ing long thing, touching it lightly with his hand, then 
rubbing his hand on his thigh. He walked slowly around 
it and touched the tires, mumbling to himself and 
shaking his head. Then he returned to the salvia bed, 
where Bayard, emerging presently, found him. 

“Want to take a ride, Simon?” he said. 

Simon’s hoe ceased and he straightened up, “Who, 
me?” 


“Sure. Come on. We’ll go up the road a piece.” 

Simon stood with his static hoe, rubbing his head 
slowly. 

“Come on,” Bayard said, “we’ll just go up the road 
a piece. It won’t hurt you.” 

^ Naw, suh,” Simon agreed, ‘*I don’t reckon hit’s 
gwine ter hurt me.” 

He allowed himself to be drawn gradually toward 

the car, gazing at its various members with slow, blink- 

ing speculation, now tliat it was about to become an 

actual quantity in his life. At the door and with one 

foot raised to the running-board, he made a final stand 

against the subtle powers of evil judgment. “You ain’t 

^ine run it th’ough de buslies like you en Isom done 
dat day, is you?” 

Bayard reassured him, and he got in slowly, with 

115 



mumbled sounds of anticipatory concern, and he sat 
well forward on tlie seat with his feet drawn under 
him, clutching the door with one hand and a lump of 
shirt on his chest with the other as the car moved down 
the drive. They passed through the gates and on to 
the road, and still he sat hunched forward on the seat. 
The car gained speed, and with a sudden convulsive 
motion he caught his hat just as it blew off his head. 

“I ’speck dis is fur enough, ain’t it?” he suggested, 
raising his voice. He pulled his hat down on his head, 
but when he released it he had to clutch wildly at it 
again, and lie removed it and clasped it beneath his 
arm, and again his hand fumbled at his breast and 
clutched something beneath his shirt. “I got to weed 
dat bed dis mawnin’,” he said, louder still. “Please, 
suh. Mist’ Bayard,” he added, and his wizened old body 
sat yet further forward on the seat and he cast quick, 
covert glances at the steadily increasing rush of the 
roadside growth. 

Then Bayard leaned forward and Simon watched 
his forearm tauten, and then they shot forward on a 
roar of sound like blurred thunder. Earth, the un- 
believable ribbon of the road, crashed beneath them 
and away behind into mad dust, and the roadside 
greenery was a tunnel rigid and streaming and un- 
broken. But he said no word, made no other sound, and 
when Bayard glanced the cruel derision of his teeth at 
him presently, Simon knelt on the floor, his old disrepu- 
table hat under his arm and his hand clutching a fold 
of his shirt on his breast. Later Bayard glanced at him 
again, and Simon was watching him and the blurred 
irises of his eyes were no longer a melting, pupilless 
brown : they were red, and in the blast of w'lnd they 
unwinking and in them was that mindless phos- 

116 


were 



phorescence of an animal’s, Bayard jammed the throt- 
tle down to the floor. 

The wagon was moving drowsily and peacefully 
along the road. It was drawn by two mules and was 
filled with negro women asleep in chairs. Some of them 
wore drawers. The mules themselves didn’t wake at all, 
but ambled sedately on wdth the empty wagon and the 
overturned chairs, even when the car crashed into the 
shallow ditch and surged back on to the road again and 
thundered on without slowing. The thunder ceased, 
but the car rushed on under its own momentum, and 
it began to sway from side to side as Bayard tried to 
drag Simon’s hands from the switch. But Simon knelt 
in the floor with his eyes shut tightly and the air-blast 
toying with the grizzled remnant of his hair, holding 
the switch with both hands. 

“Turn it loose!” Bayard shouted. 

“Dat’s de way you stops it, Lawd ! Dat’s de way you 
stops it, Lawd!” Simon chanted, keeping the switch 
covered with his hands while Bayard hammered at tliem 
with his fist. And he clung to it until the car slowed 
and stopped. Then he fumbled the door open and 
climbed out. Bayard called to him, but he went on 
back down the road at a rapid limping shuffle. 

“Simon!” Bayard called again. But Simon went on 
stiffly, like a man who has been deprived of the use of 
his legs for a long time. “Simon!” But he neither 
slowed nor looked back, and Bayard started the car 
again and drove on until he could turn it, Simon now 
sto<^ in the ditch beside the road, his head bent above 
his^hands, when Bayard overtook him and stopped. 

“Come on here and get in,” he commanded. 

^ Naw, suh. I’ll walk.” 

Jump in, now,” Bayard ordered sharply. He 

117 



opened tlie door, but Simon stood in the ditch with his 
hand thrust inside his shirt, and Bayard could see that 
he was shaking as with an ague. “Come on, you old 
fool; I’m not going to hurt you.” 

“I’ll walk home,” Simon repeated stubbornly, but 
without heat. “You git on wid dat thing.” 

“Ah, get in, Simon. I didn’t know I’d scare you that 
bad. I’ll drive slow. Come on.” 

“You git on home,” Simon said again. “Dey’ll be 
worried erbout you. You kin tell ’um whar I’m at,” 

Bayard watched him for a moment, but Simon was 
not looking at him, and presently he slammed the door 
and drove on. Nor did Simon look up even then, even 
when the car burst once more into thunder and a sound- 
less dun crash of fading dust. After a while the wagon 
emerged from the dust, the mules now at a high, fiop- 
eared trot, and jingled past him, leaving behind it upon 
the dusty, insect-rasped air a woman’s voice in a 
quavering wordless hysteria. This faded slowly down 
the shimmering reaches of the valley, and Simon re- 
moved from the breast of his shirt an object slung by 
a greasy cord about his neck. It was small and of no 
particular shape and it was covered with soiled, napped 
fur — the first joint of the hind leg of a rabbit, caught 
supposedly in a graveyard in the dark of the moon, 
and Simon rubbed it through the sweat on his forehead 
and on the back of his neck; then he returned it to his 
bosom. His hands were still trembling, and he put his 
hat on and got back into the road and turned home- 
ward through the dusty noon. 

Bayard drove on down the valley toward town, pass- 
ing the iron gates and the serene white house among its 
trees, and went on at speed. The sound of the unmuffled 

118 



engine crashed into the dust and swirled it into lethar- 
gic bursting shapes and faded across the planted land. 
Just outside of town he came upon another wagon and 
he held the car upon it until the mules reared, tilting 
the wagon; then he swerved and whipped past with 
not an inch to spare, so close that the yelling negro in 
the wagon could see the lipless and savage derision of 
his teeth. 


He went on. In a mounting swoop like a niggard 
zoom the cemetery with his great-grandfather in pom- 
pous effigy flashed past, and he thought of old Simon 
trudging along the dusty road toward home, clutching 
his rabbit’s foot, and he felt savage and ashamed. 

Town among its trees, its shady streets like green 
tunnels, along which tight lives accomplished their 
peaceful tragedies. He closed the muffler and at a sedate 
pace he approached the square. The clock on the court- 
house lifted its four faces above the trees, in glimpses 
seen between arching vistas of trees. Ten minutes to 
twelve. At twelve exactly his grandfather would repair 
to the office in the rear of tlie bank and drink the pint 
of buttermilk which he brought in witli him in a vacuum 
bottle every morning, and then sleep for an hour on the 

When Bayard turned on to the squax-e the 
tilted chair in the bank door was already vacant. He 
slowed the car and eased it in to the curb before a 
propped sandwich-board. 


Fresh Catfish Today the board stated in letters of 
jquefied chalk, and through the screen doors beyond 
It came a smeU of refrigerated food— cheese and pickle 
and such—with a faint overtone of fried grease. 

He stood for a while on the sidewalk, while the noon 
hrong parM and flowed about him — negroes slow and 
aimless as figures of a dark, placid dream, with an 


119 



animal odor, murmuring and laughing among them- 
selves ; there was in their consonantless murmuring 
something ready with mirth, in their laughter some- 
thing grave and sad^-country people, men in overalls 
or corduroy or khaki and without neckties, women in 
shapeless calico and sunbonnets and snuff-sticks — 
groups of young girls in stiff mail-order finery, the 
young heritage of their bodies’ grace dulled already 
by self-consciousness and labor and unaccustomed high 
heels, and soon to be obscured forever by childbeanng 
— youths and young men in cheap, tasteless suits and 
shirts and caps, weather-tanned and clean-limbed as 
race-liorses and a little belligerently blatant. Against 
the wall, squatting, a blind negro beggar, with a guitar 
and a wire frame holding a mouth-organ to his lips, 
patterned the background of smells and sounds with a 
plaintive reiteration of rich, monotonous chords, 
rhythmic as a mathematical formula, but without 
music. He w'as a man of at least forty and his was that 
patient resignation of many sightless years; yet he too 
wore filthy khaki with a corporal’s stripes on one sleeve 
and a crookedly-sewn Boy Scout emblem on the other, 
and on his breast a button commemorating the fourth 
Liberty Loan and a small metal brooch bearing two 
gold stars, obviously intended for female adornment. 
His weathered derby was encircled by an officer’s hat- 
cord, and on the pavement between his feet sat a tin 
cup containing a dime and three pennies. 

Bayard sought a coin in his pocket, and the beggar 
sensed his approach and his tune became a single re- 
peated chord, but without a break in the rhythm, until 
the coin rang into the cup, and still without a break in 
the rhythm and the meaningless strains of the mouth- 
organ, his left hand dropped, groping a little, to the 

120 



cup and read the coin in a single motion ; then once 
more guitar and mouth-organ resumed their monoto- 
nous pattern. As Bayard turned away some one spoke 
at his side — a broad, squat man with a keen weathered 
face and gray temples. He wore corduroys and boots, 
and his body was the supple body of a horseman, and 
his brown still hands were the hands that horses love. 
MacCallum his name, one of a family of six brothers 
who lived eighteen miles away in the hills and with 

whom Bayard and John hunted foxes and ’coons durini? 
their vacations, ® 

y^urn.” MacCallum 
sai(L Thats her, is it?” He stepped down from the 

curb and moved easily about the car, examining it, his 

hands on his hips. “Too much barrel,” he said, “and 

she looks heay in the withers. Clumsy. Have to use a 
curb on her, I reckon?” 

yoij'wEhe’n 

nn t^fi obliged,” the other answered. He stepped 
on to the pavement again, among the negroes gathered 
to stare at the car The clock on the courthouse struck 
toelve, and already along the street there came in 
s^ll groups children going home from school for the 
n^n recess— little girls with colored boxes and skip- 

FntenseT^’ ^““"1 »®ong themselves of 

r* j I affairs, and buys in various stac-es 

of deshabiUe, shouting and scuffling and jostlin^the 
little girls, who shrank together and gare the little 
Ws cold reverted glares. “Going to ^at a snaA ” 
MacCallum explained. He crossed the pavement and 

P.M u. hiXia™.i; “■> *" 

121 



The store was half grocery and confectionery, and 
half restaurant. A number of customers stood about 
the cluttered but clean front, with sandwiclies and bot- 
tles of soda-water, and the proprietor bobbed his head 
at them wdth flurried, slightly distrait affability above 
the counter. The rear half was filled with tables at 
which a number of men and a woman or so, mostly 
country people, sat eating with awkward and solemn 
decorum. Next to this was the kitchen, filled with frying 
odors and the brittle hissing of it, where two negroes 
moved like wraiths in a blue lethargy of smoke. They 
crossed this room and MacCallum opened a door set 
in an outthrust angle of the wall, and they entered a 
smaller room, or rather a large closet. There was a 
small window high in the wall, and a bare table and 
three or four chairs, and presently the younger of the 

two negroes followed them. 

“Yes, suh, Mr. MacCallum and Mr. Sartoris.” He 
set two freshly rinsed glasses, to which water yet 
adhered in sliding beads, on the table, and stood drying 
his hands on his apron. He had a broad, untroubled 

face, a reliable sort of face. ^ 

“Lemons and sugar and ice,” MacCallum said. You 

don’t want none of that soda-pop, do you?” The negro 

paused with his hand on the door. 

“No,” Bayard answered. “Rather have a toddy my- 


“Yes, suh,” the negro agreed. “Y’ all wants a t^dy.’ 
And he bowed again with grave approval, and turned 
again and stepped aside as the proprietor m a fresh 
apron entered at his customary distracted trot and 

stood rubbing his hands on his thighs. ■nr? 

“Morning, morning,” he said. “How’re you, Rafe? 

122 



Bayard, I saw Miss Jenny and tlie old Colonel going 
up to Doc Peabody’s office tlie other day. Ain’t nothing 
wrong, is there?” His head was like an inverted egg; 
his hair curled meticulously away from the part in tlie 
center into two careful reddish-brown wings, like a 
toupee, and his eyes were a melting, passionate brown. 

“Come in here and shut that door,” I^IacCallum 
ordered, drawing the other into the room. He produced 
from beneath his coat a bottle of astonishing propor- 
tions and set it on the table. It contained a delicate 
amber liquid, and the proprietor rubbed his hands on 
his thighs, and his hot mild gaze gloated upon it. 

“Great Savior,” he said, “wherc’d you have tlmt 
demijohn Iiid? In your pants leg?” MacCallum un- 
corked the bottle and extended it and the proprietor 
leaned fonvard and sniffed it, his e.ves closed. He sighed. 

^ Henry s,” MacCallum said. “Best run he’s made in 
SIX months. Reckon you’d take a drink if Bayaid and 

me was to hold you?” The other cackled loudly, 
unctuously. 

* comical feller, now?” he asked Bayard, 
borne joker, ain’t he?” He glanced at the table. “You 

am got but two gl ’* Some one tapped at the 

door ; the proprietor leaned his conical head to it and 
waggled his hand at them. MacCallum concealed the 
bottle without haste as the other opened the door. It 
was the negro, with another glass and lemons and 

^tted Wm “ =™<=ked bowl. The proprietor ad- 

hnl rif "P stepped out 

but I U be back in a minute, Houston.” 

the tahl’.'M’”n‘’u"®®'‘° ’’"•■den on 

b e. MacCallum produced the bottle again. 

123 



“Wliat do you keep on telling your customers that 
old lie for?” he asked. “Everybody knows what you are 
doing.” 

The proprietor cackled again, gloating upon the bot- 
tle. “Yes, sir,” he repeated, “he’s sure some joker. 
Well, you boys have got plenty of time, but I got to 
get on back and keep things running.” 

“Go ahead,” MacCallum told him, and the proprietor 
made himself a toddy. He raised the glass, stirring it 
and sniffing it alternately, while the others followed 
suit. Then he removed his spoon and laid it on the 
table. 

“Well, I hate to hurry a good thing mighty bad,” 
lie said, “but business don’t wait on pleasure, you 
know.” 

“Work does interfere with a man’s drinking,” Mac- 
Callum agreed. 

“Yes, sir, it sure does,” the other replied. He raised 
his glass. “Your father’s good health,” he said and 
drank. “I don’t see the old gentleman in town much, 


now.idavs.” 

“No,” MacCallum answered, “he ain’t never got over 
Buddy being in the Yankee army. Claims he ain’t 
coming to town again until the Democratic part3^ denies 

Woodrow Wilson.” 

“It’ll be the best thing they ever done, if they was 
to recall him and elect a man like Debs or Senator 
Vardanian president,” the proprietor agreed sagely. 
“Well, tliat sure was fine. Henry’s sure a wonder, am t 
he?” He set his glass down and turned to the door. 
“Well, you boys make yourselves at home. If you want 
anything, just call Houston.” And he bustled out at 

his distracted trot. . 

Sit down,” MacCallum said. He drew up a chair, 


1^4 



and Bayard drew another up opposite across the table. 
“Deacon sure ought to know good whisky. He’s drunk 
enough of it to float his counters right out tlie front 
door.” He filled his glass and pushed the bottle across 
to Bayard, and they drank again, quietly. 

“You look bad, son,” MacCallum said suddenly, and 

Bayard raised liis head and found the other examining 

him with his keen, steady eyes. “Overtrained,” he added. 

Bayard made an abrupt gesture of negation and raised 

his glass, but he could still feel the other watching liim 

steadily. “Well, you haven’t forgot how to drink good 

whisky, anyhow. . . . Why don’t you come out and 

take a hunt with us? Got an old red we been saving for 

you. Been running him off and on for two years, now, 

with the young dogs. Ain’t put old General on him yet, 

because the old feller’ll nose him out, and we wanted 

to save him for you boys. John would have enjoyed 

that fox. You remember that night Johnny cut across 

down to Samson’s bridge ahead of the dogs, and when 

we got- there, here come him and the fox floating down 

the river on that drift log, the fox on one end and 

Johnny on the other, singing that fool song as loud as 

he could yell? John would have enjoyed this fox. He 

outsmarts them young dogs every time. But old Gen- 
eral’ll get him.” 

Bayard sat turning his glass in his hand. He reached 
a packet of cigarettes from his jacket and shook a few 
of them on to the table at his hand and flipped the 
packet across to the other. MacCallum drank his toddy 
8 ea 1 y and refilled his glass. Bayard lit a cigarette 
and emptied his glass and reached for the bottle. 

^ \ ou look like hell, boy,” MacCallum repeated. 

* reckon,” Bayard answered in a voice as level 
as the otliers. He made himself another toddy, his, 

125 



cigarette smoking on the table edge. He raised the glass> 
but instead of drinking, he held it for a moment be- 
neath his nose while the muscles at the base of his 
nostrils tautened wliitely, then he swung the glass from 
him and with a steady hand he emptied it on the floor. 
Tlie other watched him quietly while he poured liis glass 
lialf full of raw liquor and sloshed a little water into 
it and tilted it down his throat. “I’ve been good too 
damn long,” he said aloud, and he fell to talking of 
the war. Not of combat, but rather of a life peopled 
bv voung men like fallen angels, and of a meteoric 
violence like that of fallen angels, beyond heaven or 
hell and partaking of both: doomed immortality and 
immortal doom. 

MacCallum sat and listened quietly, drinking his 
whiskv steadily and slowly and without appreciable 
effect, as though it were milk he drank, and Bayard 
talked on and presently found himself without surprise 
eating food. Tlie bottle was now less than half full. 
The negro Houston had brought .tlie food in and had 
his drink, taking it neat and without batting an eye. 
“Kf I had a cow dat give dat, de calf wouldn’t git no 
milk a-tall,” he said, “and I wouldn’t never churn. 

Thanky, Mr. MacCallurn, suh.” 

Then he was out, and Bayard’s voice went on, filling 

the cubbyhole of a room, surmounting the odor ot 
cheap food too quickly cooked and of sharp, spilt 
whisky with ghosts of a thing high-pitched as a 
hysteria, like a glare of fallen meteors on the dark 
retina of the world. Again a light tap at the doo^ and 
the proprietor’s egg-shaped head and his hot, diffiden 

^“You gentlemen got everything you want?” be 
asked, rubbing his hands on his thighs. 

126 



“Come and get it,” MacCallum said, jerking his 

head toward the bottle, and tlie other made himself a 

toddy in his stale glass and drank it, while Bayard 

finished his tale of himself and an Australian major 

and two ladies in the Leicester lounge one evening (the 

Leicester lounge being out of bounds, and the Anzac 

lost two teeth and his girl, and Bayard himself got a 

black eye), watching the narrator with round, molti 
astonishment. 


Great Savior,” he said, “them av’aytors w'as sure 

some hell-raiscrs, wasn’t they? Well, I reckon they're 

wanting me up front again. You got to keep on the 

jump to make a living, these days.” And he scuttled 
out again. 

‘Tyc been good too goddam long,” Bayard repeated 

the' two glasses. 

1 hat s the only thing Johnny was ever good for. Kept 
me from getting m a rut. Bloody rut, with a couple of 
old women nagging at me and nothing to do e.Kcept 
scare niggers.” He drank his whisky and set the glass 

° T’-fi <=>ntching It. “Damn ham-handed Hun ” he 
said. He never could fly, anyway. I kept trying to 

keep ym from going up there on that goddam pop- 

gun, and he cursed his dead brother savagely. Then 

mVrh^^nrvi* ® halfway to his 

niv drink go.^” ' 

MacCallum emptied the bottle into Bayard’s elass 

the*^ tumblfr on 

Hk ^ ’n'-clicd back against the wall 

His chair crashed over backward, and he braced him- 
self, staring at the other. “I kept on trying to keep hi^ 

from going up there, with that Camel.' Bu^ he gave me 
a burst. Right across my nose.” ® 

MacCallum rose also. “Come on here,” he said 

127 



quietly, and he offered to take Bayard’s arm, but 
Ba3’ard evaded him and they passed through the 
kitchen and traversed the long tunnel of the store. 
Baj'ard walked steadily enough, and the proprietor 
bobbed his head at them across the counter. 

“Call again, gentlemen,” he said, “call again,” 

“All right. Deacon,” MacCallum answered. Bayard 
strode on. As they passed the soda-fountain a young 
law'3’er standing beside a stranger addressed him. 

“Captain Sartoris, shake hands with Mr. Gratton 
here. Gratton was up on the British front last spring. 
The stranger turned and extended his hand, but Bay- 
ard stared at him bleakly and strode so steadily on that 
the other involuntarily gave back in order not to be 


overborne, 

“Why, God damn his soul,” he said to Bayard’s back. 

The lawyer gras|>ed his arm. j i » 

“He’s drunk,” he whispered quickly, “he’s drunk. 
“I don’t give a damn,” the other exclaimed loudly. 
“Because he was a goddam shave-tail he thinks • 
“Shhhhh, shhhhhh,” the lawyer hissed. The pro- 
prietor came to the comer of his candy case and peered 

out with hot, round alarm. 

“Gentlemen, gentlemen !” he exclaimed. The stranger 

made another violent movement, and 

“Wait a minute while I bash his face m, he told 
MacCallum, turning. The stranger thrust the lawyer 

aside and stepped forward. 

“You never saw the day ” he began. MacCallum 

took Bayard’s arm firmly and easily. 

“Come on here, boy.” , ^ . j 

“ini bash his bloody face in,” Bayard sUted, looking 

bleakly at the angry stranger. The lawyer graspe 
companion’s arm again. 


128 



“Get away,” the stranger said, flinging him off. 
“Just let him try it. Come on, you limey 

“Gentlemen ! Gentlemen !” the proprietor wailed. 

*‘Come on here, boy,” MacCallum said. “I’ve got to 
look at a horse,” 

“A horse?” Bayard repeated. He turned obediently. 
Then he stopped and looked back. “Can’t bash your 
face in now,” he told the stranger. “Sorry. Got to look 
at a horse. Call for you later at the hotel.” But the 
stranger’s back was turned, and behind it the lawyer 
grimaced and waggled his hand at MacCallum. 

“Get him away, MacCallum, for God’s sake.” 

“Bash his face in later,” Bayard repeated. “Can’t 
bash yours, though, Eustace,” he told the lawyer. 
“Taught us in ground-school never seduce a fool nor 
hit a cripple.” 

“Come on, here,” MacCallum repeated, leading him 
on. At the door Bayard must stop again t‘o light a 
cigarette; then they went on. It was three o’clock and 
again they walked among school children in released 
surges. Bayard strode steadily enough, and a little 
belligerently, and soon MacCallum turned into a side 
street and they went on, passing negro stores, and be- 
tween a busy grist mill and a silent cotton gin they 
turned into a lane filled with tethered horses and mules. 
From the end of the lane an anvil clanged. They passed 
the ruby glow of it and a patient horse standing on 
three legs in the blacksmith’s doorway and the squat- 
ting overalled men along the shady wall, and came then 
to a high-barred gate backing a long, dun-colored brick 
tunnel smelling of ammonia. A few men sat on the top 
of the gate; others leaned their crossed arms upon it. 
From the paddock itself came voices, then through the 

129 



slatted gate gleamed a haughty, motionless shape of 
burnished flame. 

The stallion stood against the yawning cavern^ of 
the livery stable door like a motionless bronze flame, 
and along its burnished coat ran at intervals little 
trenjors of paler flame, little tongues of nervousness and 
pride. But its eye was quiet and arrogant, and occa- 
sionally and with a kingly air, its gaze swept along the 
group at the gate with a fine disdain, without seeing 
them as individuals at all, and again little tongues of 
paler flame rippled flicking along its coat. About its 
head was a rope hackamore; it was tethered to a door 
post, and in the background a white man moved about 
at a respectful distance with a proprietorial air, 
side him a negro hostler with a tow-sack tied about his 
waist with a string. MacCallum and Bayard halted at 
the gate, and the white man circled the stalbon s 
haughty immobility and crossed to them. The negro 
hostler came forth also, with a soft, dirty cloth and 
chanting in a mellow singsong. The stallion permitted 
him to approach and suffered him to erase with his rag 
the licking nervous little flames that ran in renewed 
ripples under its skin. 

“Ain’t he a picture, now?” the white man demanded 
of MacCallum, leaning his elbow on the gate. A cheap 
nickel watch was attached to his suspender loop by a 
length of rawhide lace leather worn black and soft 
with age, and his shaven beard was heaviest from the 
corners of his mouth to his chin: he looked always as 
though he were chewing tobacco with his mouth open. 
He was a horse-trader by profession, and he w^ con- 
stantly engaged in litigation with the railroad com- 
pany over the violent demise of his stock by its agency. 

130 


“Look at that nigger, now,” he added. “He’ll let Tobe 
handle him like a baby. I wouldn’t git within ten foot 
of liim, myself. Dam’f I know how Tobe does it. Must 
be some kin between a nigger and a animal, I always 
claim.” 

I reckon he’s afraid you’ll be crossing the railroad 
with him some day about the time Thirty-nine is due,” 
MacCallum said drily. 

“Yes, I reckon I have the hardest luck of any feller 
m the county,” tlie other agreed. “But they got to set- 
tle this time: I got ’em dead to rights, this time.” 

Yes, MacCallum said, “the railroad company 
ought to furnish that stock of yourn with time tables.” 
The other onlookers guffawed. 

“Ah, the company’s got plenty of money,” the trader 
rejoined. Then he said: “You talk like I might have 

druv them mules in front of that train. Lemme tell you 
how it come about ” 


I reckon you won’t never drive him in front of no 

^am. MacCallum jerked his head toward the stallion. 

Ihe negro burnished its shimmering coat, crooning to 

It in a monotonous singsong. The trader laughed. 

I reckon not,” he admitted, “not less’n Tobe goes 

Just look at him now. I wouldn’t no more walk up 
to that animal than I’d fly.” ^ 

What boss?” the trader demanded, and the other 

ovSto thel'ot -"'t 

^“You let that boss alone, young feller,” the trader 


But Bayard paid him no heed. He went on; the 

131 



stallion swept its regal regard upon him and away. 

“You let that boss alone,” the trader shouted, “op 
1*11 have tlie law on you.” 

“Let liim be,” MacCallum said. 

“And let him damage a fifteen-hundred-dollar stal- 
lion? Tliat lioss’ll kill him. You, Sartoris!” 

From his hip pocket MacCallum drew a wad of bills 
enclosed by a rubber band. “Let him be,” he repeated. 
“That’s what he wants.” 

Tlie trader glanced at the roll of money with quick 

calculation. “I take you gentlemen to witness ” he 

began loudly ; then he ceased, and they watched tensely 
ns Bayard approached the stallion. The beast swept its 
haughty, glowing eye upon him again and lifted its 
head without alarm* and snorted. The negro glanced 
over his slioulder and crouched against the animal, ai^ 
his crooning chant rose to a swifter beat. Go backi 

white folks,” he said. 

The beast snorted again and swept its head up, snap- 
ping the rope like a gossamer thread, and the n^gro 
grasped at tlie flying rope-end. “Git away, white folks. 

he cried. “Git away, quick.” i . ru 

But the stallion eluded his hand. It cropp^ its teeth 

in a vicious arc and the negro leaped spraw ing ^ e 
animal soared like a bronze explosion. Bayard had 
dodged beneath the sabring hooves, and as the horse 
swirled in a myriad flickering like fire, the spectetors 
saw that the man had contrived to take a turn with the 
rope-end about its jaws; then they saw the animal rear 
again, dragging the man from the ground whii^ 
ping his body like a rag upon its flashing arc. 
stopped, trembling, as Bayard closed lU nostrils with 
the twisted rope, and suddenly he was upon its ba^ 
while it stood with lowered head and rolhng eyes, np- 

13 * 



pling its coat into quivering tongues before exploding 
again. 

The beast burst like bronze unfolding wings ; the on- 
lookers tumbled away from the gate and hurled them- 
selves to safety as the gate splintered to matchwood 
beneath its soaring volcanic thunder. Bayard crouched 
on its shoulders and dragged its mad head around and 
they swept down tlie lane, spreading pandemonium 
among the horses and mules tetliered and patient about 
the blacksmith shop and among the wagons there. 
Where the lane debouched into the street a group of 
negroes scattered before them, and without a break in 
its stride the stallion soared over a small negro child 
clutching a stick of striped candy directly in its path. 
A wagon drawn by mules was just turning into the 
lane: these reared madly before the wild, slack-jawed 
face of the white man in the wagon, and again Bayard 
sawed his thunderbolt around and headed it away from 
the square. Down the lane behind him the spectators 
ran shouting tlirough tlie dust, the trader among them, 
and Rafe MacCallum still clutching his roll of money. 

The stallion moved beneath him like a tremendous 
mad music, uncontrolled, splendidly uncontrollable. 
The rope served only to curb its direction, not its speed, 
and among sliouts from the pavement on either hand he 
swung the animal into another street. This was a quieter 
street; soon they would be in the country, where the 
stallion could exhaust its rage without the added 
hazards of motors and pedestrians. Voices faded behind 
him in his own thunder: “Runaway! Runaway!” But 
the street was deserted save for a small automobile 
going m the same direction, and further along beneath 
the grwn tunnel, bright small spots of color scuttled 
out of the sti-eet. Children. “Hope they stay there.” he 

'• 1S3 



said to himself. His eyes were streaming a little; be- 
neath him the surging lift and fall; in his nostrils a 
sharpness of rage and energy and violated pride like 
smoke from the animal's body, and he swept past the 
motor car, remarking in a flashing second a woman’s 
face and a mouth partly open and two eyes round with 
tranquil astonishment. But the face flashed away with- 
out registering on his mind and he saw the children 
huddled on one side of the street, and on the opposite 
side a negro playing a hose on the sidewalk and beside 
him a second negro with a pitchfork. 

Some one screamed from a veranda, and the huddle 
of children broke, shrieking. A small figure in a white 
shirt and diminutive pale blue pants darted into the 
street and Bayard leaned downward and wrapped the 
rope about his hand and swerved the beast toward the 
opposite sidewalk where the two negroes stood, gape- 
mouthed. The small figure came on, flashed safely be- 
hind; then a narrow band of rushing green, a tree 
trunk like a wheel spoke in reverse, and the stallion 
struck clashing fire from wet concrete. It slid, clashed, 
fighting for balance, lunged and crashed down, and for 

Bayard a red shock, then blackness. ^ 

The horse scrambled up and whirled and poised and 
struck viciously at the prone man with its hooves, but 
the negro with the pitchfork drove it away and it 
trotted stiffly and with tossing head up the street and 
passed the halted motor-car. At the end of the street 
it stood trembling and snorting and permitted the 
negro hostler to tou,’h it. Rafe xMacCallum still clutched 

his roll of bills. 


134 



6 


They gathered him up and brought him to town in a 
commandeered motor-car and roused Dr. Peabody 
from slumber, and Dr. Peabody profanely bandaged 
Bayard’s liead and gave him a drink from tlie bottle 
which resided in tlie cluttered waste-basket, and threat- 
ened to telephone Miss Jenny if he didn’t go straight 
home. Rafe MacCallum promised to see that he did so, 
and the owner of the impressed automobile offered to 
drive him out. It was a Ford body w'ith, in place of a 
tonneau, a miniature one-room cabin of sheet iron, no 
larger than a dog kennel, in each painted w’indow of 
which a painted housewife simpered across a painted 
sewing-machine; in it an actual sewing-machine neatly 
fitted, borne tlius about the countryside by the agent. 
The agent s name was \ . R. Suratt and he now sat, with 
his shrewd, plausible face, behind the wheel. Bayard 
with his humming head sat beside him, and to tlie fen- 
der clung a youth with brown forearms and a slanted 
extremely new straw hat, who let his limber body absorb 
the jolts with negligent ease as they rattled sedately 
out of town on the valley road. 

The drink Dr. Peabody had given him, instead of 
quieting his jangled nerves, rolled sluggishly and hotly 
in his stomach and served only to nauseate iiim a little, 
and against his closed eyelids red antic shapes coiled in 
throbbing and tedious cycles. He watched them dully 
and without astonishment as they emerged from black- 
ness and swirled sluggishly and consumed themselves 
and reappeared, each time a little fainter as his mind 
cleared. And yet, somewhere blended with them and at 
the same time apart and beyond them with a tranquil 
aloofness and steadfast among their senseless convolu- 

135 



tions, was a face. It seemed to have some relation to the 
instant itself as it culminated in crashing blackness; 
at the same time it seemed, for all its aloofness, to be a 
part of the whirling ensuing chaos; a part of it, yet> 
bringing into the red vortex a sort of constant coolness 
like that of a faint, shady breeze. So it remained, aloof, 
not quite distinct, while the coiling shapes faded into a 
dull unease of physical pain from the jolting of the car, 
leaving about him like an echo that cool serenity and 
something else — a sense of shrinking, yet fascinated 
distaste of which he or something he had done was the 
object. 

Evening was coming. On either hand cotton and com 
thrust green spears above the rich, dark soil, and in the 
patches of woodland where the sun slanted among 
violet shadows, doves called moodily. After a time 
Suratt turned from the highway into a faint, rutted 
wagon-road between a field and a patch of woods, and 
they drove straight into the sun and Bayard removed 
his hat and held it before his face. 

“Sun hurt yo’ haid?’* Suratt asked. “ ’Tain’t long, 
now.” The road wound presently into the woods, where 
the sun was intermittent, and it rose to a gradual, sandy 
crest. Beyond this the land fell away in ragged, ill- 
tended fields and beyond them, in a clump of sorry fruit 
trees and a stunted* grove of silver poplar shrubs pale 
as absinthe and twinkling ceaselessly with no wind, a 
small weatliered house squatted. Beyond it and much 
larger, loomed a barn gray and gaunt with age. The 
road forked here. One faint arm curved sandily away 
toward the house; the other went on between rank 
weed toward the barn. The youth on the fender leaned 
his head into the car. “Drive on to the barn,” he 
directed. 


136 



Suratt obeyed. Beyond the bordering weeds a fence 
straggled in limp dilapidation, and from the weeds be- 
side it the handles of a plow stood at a gaunt angle 
while its share rusted peacefully in the undergrowth, 
and other implements rusted half concealed there — 
skeletons of labor healed over by the earth they were 
to have violated, kinder than they. The fence turned at 
an angle and Suratt stopped the car and the youth 
stepped dowTi and opened tlie warped wooden gate and 
Suratt drove on into the barnyard where stood a wagon 
with drunken wheels and a home-made bed, and the 
rusting skeleton of a Ford car. Low down upon its 
domed and bald radiator the two lamps gave it an ex- 
pression of beetling and patient astonishment, and a 
lean cow ruminated and watched them with moody eyes. 

The barn doors sagged drunkenly from broken 
hinges, held to the posts with twists of rusty wire; be- 
yond, the cavern of the hallway yawned in stale deso- 
lation — a travesty of earth’s garnered fullness and its 
rich inferences. Bayard sat on the fender and leaned 
his bandaged head against ihe side of tlie car and 
watched Suratt and the youth enter the barn and mount 
slowly on invisible ladder-rungs. The cow chewed in 
slow dejection, and upon the yellow surface of a pond 
enclosed by banks of trodden and sun-cracked clay, 
geese drifted like small muddy clouds. The sun fell in a 
long slant upon their rumps and upon their suave 
necks, and upon the cow’s gaunt, rhythmically twitch- 
ing flank, ridging her visible ribs with dingy gold. 
Presently Suratt’s legs fumbled into view, followed by 
his cautious body, and after him the youth slid easily 
dowTi the ladder in one-handed swoops. 

He emerged carrying an earthen jug close against 
his leg. Suratt followed in his neat, tieless blue shirt and 

137 



jerked his head at Bayard, and they turned the corner 
of the barn amon^ waist-high jimson weeds. Bayard 
overtook them as the youth with his jug slid with a 
single motion between two lax strands of barbed wire. 
Suratt stooped through more sedately, and he held the 
top strand taut and set his foot on the lower one until 
Bayard was through. Behind the barn the ground de- 
scended into shadow, toward a junglish growth of 
willow and elder, against which a huge beech and a 
clump of saplings stood like mottled ghosts and from 
which a cool dankness rose like a breath to meet them. 
The spring welled from the roots of the beech, into a 
wooden frame sunk to its top in white sand that quiv- 
ered ceaselessly and delicately beneath the water’s 
limpid unrest, and went on into the willow and elder 
growth. 

The earth about the spring was trampled smooth and 
packed as an earthen floor. Near the spring a blackened 
iron pot sat on four bricks; beneath it was a heap of 
pale wood-ashes and a litter of extinct brands and 
charred fagot-ends. Against the pot leaned a scrubbing- 
board with a ridged metal face, and a rusty tin cup 
hung from a nail in the tree above the spring. The 
youth set the jug down and he and Suratt squatted be- 
side it. 

“I don’t know if we ain’t a-goin’ to git in trouble, 
givin’ Mr. Bayard whisky, Hub,” Suratt said. “Still, 
Doc Peabody give him one dram hisself ; so I reckon 
we kin give him one mo’. Ain’t that right, Mr. 
ard?” Squatting, he looked up at Bayard with his 
shrewd affable face. Hub twisted the corn-cob stopper 
from the jug and passed it to Suratt, w'lio tendered i 
to Bayard. “I been knowin’ Mr. Bayard ever sin« he 
was a chap in knee pants,” Suratt confided to Hub. 

138 



“But this is the first time me and him ever taken a 
drink together. Ain’t that so, Mr. Bayard? ... I 
reckon you’ll want a drinkin’-cup, won’t you?” But 
Bayard was already drinking, with the jug tilted across 
his horizontal forearm and the mouth held to his lips 
by the same hand, as it should be done. “He knows how 
to drink outen a jug, don’t he?” Suratt added. “I 
knowed he was all right,” he said in a tone of con- 
fidential vindication. Bayard lowered the jug and re- 
turned it to Suratt, who tendered it formally to Hub. 

“Go ahead,” Hub said. “Hit it.” Suratt did so, with 
measured pistonings of his Adam’s apple. Above the 
stream gnats whirled and spun in a leveling ray of sun- 
light, like erratic golden .chaff, Suratt lowered tlie jug 
and passed it to Hub and wiped his mouth on the back 
of his hand. 

“How you feel now, Mr. Bayard?” he asked. Then 
he said heavily: “You’ll have to excuse me. I reckon I 
ought to said Cap’m Sartoris, oughtn’t I?” 

“What for?” Bayard asked. He squatted also on his 
heels against the bole of the beech tree. The rising 
slope of ground behind them hid the barn and the 
house, and the three of them squatted in a small bowl 
of peacefulness remote from the world and time, and 
filled with the cool and limpid breathing of the spring 
and a seeping of sunlight among the elders and willows 
like a thinly diffused wine. On the surface of the spring 
the sky lay refiected, stippled over wnth windless beech 
l^ves. Hub squatted leanly, his brown forearms clasped 
about his knees, smoking a cigarette beneath the tilt of 
his hat. Suratt was across the spring from him. He wore 
a faded blue shirt, and in contrast to it his hands and 
face were a rich, even brown, like mahogany. The jug 
sat rotund and benignant between them. 

1S9 


“Yes, sir,” Suratt repeated, “I always find the best 
cure fer a wound is plenty of whisky. Doctors, these 
here fancy young doctors, ’ll tell a feller different, but 
old Doc Peabody hisself cut off my granpappy’s laig 
while granpappy laid back on the kitchen table with a 
demijohn in his hand and a mattress and a cheer acrost 
his laigs and fo’ men a-holdin’ him down, and him 
cussin’ and singin’ so scandalous the womenfolks and 
the chillen went down to the pasture behind the bam 
and waited. Take some moV’ he said, and he passed the 
jug across the spring and Bayard drank again. 
“Reckon you’re beginnin’ to feel pretty fair, ain’t 
you?” 

“Damned if I know,” Bayard answered. “It’s dyna- 
mite, boys.” 

Suratt poised the jug and guffawed, then he lipped 
it and his Adam’s apple pumped again, in relief against 
the wall of elder and willow. The elder would soon 
flower, with pale clumps of tiny bloom. Miss Jenny 
made a little wine of it every year. Good wine, if you 
knew how and had the patience. Elder-flower wine. Like 
a ritual for a children’s game; a game played by little 
girls in small pale dresses, between supper and twilight. 
Above the bowl where sunlight yet came in a leveling 
beam, gnats whirled and spun like dust-motes in a still, 
disused room. Suratt’s voice went on affably, ceaselessly 
rccapitulant, in polite admiration of the hardness^ of 
Bayard’s head and the fact that this was the first time 
he and Bayard had ever taken a drink together. 

They drank again, and Hub began to borrow ciga- 
rettes of Bayard and he too became a little profanely 
and robustly anecdotal in his country idiom, about 
whisky and girls and dice; and presently he and Suratt 
were arguing amicably about work. They appeared to 

140 



be able to sit tirelessly and without discomfort on their 
heels, but Bayard’s legs had soon grown numb and he 
straightened them, tingling with released blood, and 
he now sat with his back against the tree and his long 
legs straight before him, hearing Suratt’s voice without 
listening to it. 

His head was now no more than a sort of taut dis- 
comfort; at times it seemed to float away from his 
shoulders and hang against the green wall like a trans- 
parent balloon, within which or beyond which that 
face that would neither emerge completely nor yet fade 
completely away, lingered with shadowy exasperation 
— ^two eyes round with grave, shocked astonishment, 
two lifted hands flashing behind little white shirt and 
blue pants swerving into a lifting rush plunging clatter 
crash blackness. . . , 

Suratt’s slow, plausible voice went on steadily, but 
without any irritant quality. It seemed to fit easily into 
the still scene, speaking of earthy things. “Way I 
learnt to chop cotton,” he was saying, “my oldest 
brother taken and put me in the row ahead of him. 
Started me off, and soon’s I taken a lick or two, here 
he come behind me. And ever’ time my hoe chopp^ 
once, I could hear hisn chop t^^nce. I never had no shoes 
in them days, neither,” he added drily. “So I had to 
learn to chop fast, with that ’ere hoe of hisn cuttin’ at 
my bare heels. But I swo’ then, come what mought, I 
wouldn’t never plant nothin’ in the ground, soon’s I 
could he’p myself. It’s all right fer folks that owns 
the l^nd, but folks like my folks was don’t never own 
no land, and ever’ time we made a furrow, we was 
scratchm dirt fer somebody else.” The gnats danced 
and whirled more madly yet in the sun, above the secret 
places of the stream, and the sun’s light was taking on 

141 


a rich copper tinge. Suratt rose. “Well, boys, I got to 
git on back toVds town, myself.” He looked at Bayard 
again with his shrewd, kind face. “I reckon Mr. Bay- 
ard’s clean fergot about that knock he taken, ain’t 
he.^” 

“Dammit,” Bayard said, “quit calling me Mr. 
Bayard.” 

Suratt picked up the jug. “I knowed he was all 
right, when you got to know him,” he told Hub, “I 
been knowin’ him since he was knee-high to a grass- 
hopper, but me and him jest ain’t been throwed to- 
gether like tliis. I was raised a pore boy, fellers, while 
Mr, Bayard’s folks has lived on that ’ere big place with 
plenty of money in the bank and niggers to wait on ’em. 
But he’s all right,” he repeated. “He ain’t goin’ to say 
nothin’ about who give him this here whisky.” 

“Let him tell if he wants to*” Hub answered. “I 
don’t give a damn.” 

They drank again. The sun was almost gone, and 
from the secret marshy places of the stream came a 
fairylike piping of young frogs. The gaunt invisible 
cow lowed barnward, and Hub replaced the corn cob in 
the jug and drove it home with a blow of his palm, and 
they mounted the hill and crawled through the fence. 
The cow stood in the bam door and watched them 
approach and lowed again, moody and mournful. The 
geese had left the pond and they now paraded sedately 
across the barnyard towards the house, in the door of 
which, framed by two crape myrtle bushes, a woman 
stood. 

“Hub,” she said in a flat, country voice. 

“Coin’ to town,” Hub answered shortly. “Sue’ll have 

to milk.” . , 

The woman stood quietly in the door. Hub carried 

142 



the jug into the barn and the cow followed him, and 
he heard her and turned and gave her a resounding 
kick in her gaunt ribs and cursed her without heat. 
Presently he reappeared and went on to tlie gate and 
opened it, and Suratt drove through. Then he closed it 
and wired it to again and swung on to the fender. 
Bayard moved over and prevailed on Hub to get inside. 
The woman stood yet in the door, watching them 
quietly. About the doorstep the geese surged erratically 
with discordant cries, their necks undulant and suave 
as formal gestures in a pantomime. 

The shadow of the fruit trees fell long across the un- 
tidy fields, and the car pushed its elongated shadow 
before it like the shadow of a huge, hump-shouldered 
bird. They mounted the sandy hill in the last of the 
sun and dropped downward out of the sunlight and 
into violet dusk. The road was soundless with sand, and 
the car lurched in the worn and shifting ruts and on 
to the highroad again. 

The waxing moon stood overhead. As yet it gave off 
no night, though, and they drove on toward town, pass- 
ing an occasional country wagon homeward bound. 
These Suratt, who knew nearly every soul in the county, 
greeted with a grave gesture of his brown hand, and 
presently where the road crossed a wooden bridge 
among more willows and elder and where dusk was 

denser and more palpable, Suratt stopped the car and 
climbed out over the door. 

“You fellers set still,” he said. “I won’t be but a 
minute. Got to fill that ’ere radiator.” They heard him 
at the rear of the car; then he reappeared with a tin 
bucket and let himself gingerly down the roadside bank 
beside the bridge. Water chuckled and murmured be- 
neath the bridge, invisible in the twilight, its murmur 

143 



burdened with the voice of cricket and frog. Above the 
willows that marked the course of the stream gnats 
still spun and whirled, for bull bats appeared from 
nowhere in long swoops, in mid swoop vanished, then 
appeared again swooping against the serene sky, silent 
as drops of water on a window-pane; swift and noise- 
less and intent as though their wings were feathered 
with twilight and with silence. 

Suratt scrambled up the bank with his pail and 
removed the cap and tilted the bucket above the radi- 
ator. The moon stood w’ithout emphasis overhead; yet a 
faint shadow of Suratt’s head and shoulders fell upon 
the hood of the car, and upon the pallid planking of 
the bridge the leaning willow fronds were faintly and 
delicately penciled in shadow. The last of the water 
gurgled with faint rumblings into the engine’s interior 
and Suratt replaced the pail and climbed over the 
blind door. The lights w^ere operated from a generator ; 
he switched these on now. While the car was in low 
speed, the lights glared to crescendo, but when he let 
the clutch in they dropped to a wavering glow no 

more than a luminous shadow. 

Night was fully come when they reached town. 
Across the land the lights on the courthouse clock were 
like yellow beads above the trees, and upon the green 
afterglow a column of smoke stood like a balanced 
plume. Suratt put them out at the restaurant and 
drove on, and they entered and the proprietor raised 
his conical head and his round, melting eyes from be- 
hind the soda-fountain. , « • «« 

“Great Savior, boy,” he exclaimed, am t you gone 

home vet? Doc Peabody’s been huntin’ you ever since 
four o’clock, and Miss Jenny drove to 
riage, looking for you. You’ll kill yourself. 

144 



“Get to hell on back yonder, Deacon,” Bayard 
answered, “and bring me and Hub about two dollars’ 
worth of ham and eggs.” 


Later they returned for the jug in Bayard’s car, 

Bayard and Hub and a third young man, freight agent 

at the railway station, with three negroes and a bull 

fiddle in the rear seat. But they drove no farther than 

the edge of the field above the house and stopped there 

while Hub went on afoot down the sandy road toward 

the barn. The moon stood pale and cold overhead, and 

on all sides insects shrilled in the dusty undergrowth. 

In the rear seat the negroes murmured among them- 
selves. 


Fine night,” Mitch, the freight agent, suggested. 
Bayard made no reply. He smoked moodily, his head 
closely helmeted in its white bandage. Moon and in- 
sets were one, audible and visible, dimensionless and 
without source. 

After a while Hub materiabzed against the dis- 
solving vagueness of the road, crowned by the silver 
slant of his hat, and he came up and swung the jug 

on to the door and removed the stopper. Mitch passed 
it to Bayard, 


“Drink,” Bayard said, and Mitch did so. The others 
drank* 


ii 


nothin’ for the niggers to drink out 

of,” Hub said. 

“That’s so,’» Mitch agreed. He turned in his seat. 
Am t one of you boys got a cup or something.?” The 
negroes murmured again, questioning one another in 
mellow consternation. 

and removed the cap from the breather-pipe. “It’U 

145 



taste a little like oil for a drink or two. But you boys 
won’t notice it after that.” 

“Naw, suh,” the negroes agreed in chorus. One took 
the cup and wiped it out with the corner of his coat, 
and they too drank in turn, with smacking expulsions 
of breath. Bayard replaced the cap and got in the car. 

“Anybody want another right now.^” Hub asked, 
poising the corn cob. 

“Give Mitch another,” Bayard directed. “He’ll have 
to catch up.” 

Mitch drank again. Then Bayard took the jug and 
tilted it. The others watched him respectfully. 

“Dam’f he don’t drink it,” Mitch murmured. “I’d 
be afraid to hit it so often, if I was you.” 

“It’s my damned head.” Bayard lowered the jug 
and passed it to Hub. “I keep thinking another drink 
will ease it off some.” 

“Doc put that bandage on too tight,” Hub said. 

“Want it loosened some.^” ^ 

“I don’t know.” Bayard lit another cigarette anu 

threw the match away. “I believe I’ll take it off. It s 
been on there long enough.” He raised his hands and 
fumbled at the bandage. 

“You better let it alone,” Mitch warned him. But 
he continued to fumble at the fastening; then he slid 
his fingers beneath a turn of the cloth and tugged 
at it savagely. One of the negroes leaned forward with 
a pocket knife and severed it, and they watched him as 

he stripped it off and flung it away. 

^‘You ought not to done that,’’ Mitch told him* 

“Ah, let him take it off if he wants,” Hub said. 
“He’s all right.” He got in and stowed the jug away 
between his knees, and Bayard turned the car about. 
The sandy road hissed beneath the broad tires of it 

146 


and rose shaling into the woods again where the dap- 
pled moonlight was intermittent, treacherous with dis- 
solving vistas. Invisible and sourceless among the shift- 
ing patterns of light and shade, whippoorwills were 
like flutes tongued liquidly. The road passed out of the 
woods and descended, with sand in shifting and silent 
lurches, and they turned on to the valley road and 
away from town. 

The car went on, on the dry hissing of the closed 
muffler. The negroes murmured among themselves with 
mellow snatches of laughter whipped like scraps of torn 
paper away behind. They passed the iron gates and 
Bayard's home serenely in the moonlight among its 
trees, and the silent, box-like flag station and the metal- 
roofed cotton gin on the railroad siding. 

The road rose at last into hills. It was smooth and 

empty and winding, and the negroes fell silent as 

Bayard increased speed. But still it was not anything 

like wliat they had anticipated of him. Twice more 

they stopped and drank, and then from an ultimate 

hilltop they looked down upon another cluster of lights 

like a clotting of beads upon the pale gash where the 

railroad ran. Hub produced the breather-cap and they 
drank again. ^ 

Through streets identical with those at home they 
moved slowly, toward an identical square. People on 
^e square turned and looked curiously after tliem. 
lliey crossed the square and followed another street 
and went on between broad lawns and shaded windows, 
and presently beyond an iron fence and well back 
among black-and-silver trees, lighted windows hung in 

branches ^®<^tangular lanterns strung among 

They stopped here, in shadow. The negroes de- 

147 



scended and lifted the bass viol out, and a guitar. The 
third one held a slender tube frosted over with keys 
upon which the intermittent moon glinted in pale 
points, and they stood with their heads together, mur- 
muring among themselves and touching plaintive muted 
chords from the strings. Then the one with the clarinet 
raised it to his lips. 

The tunes were old tunes. Some of them were 
sophisticated tunes and formally intricate, but in the 
rendition this was lost, and all of them were imbued 
instead with a plaintive similarity, a slurred and 
rhytlimic simplicity ; and they drifted in rich, plaintive 
chords upon the silver air, fading, dying in minor 
reiterations along the treacherous vistas of the moon. 
They played again, an old waltz. Tlie college Cerberus 
came across the dappled lawn to tlie fence and leaned 
his arms upon it, a lumped listening shadow among 
other shadows. Across the street, in the shadows there, 
other listeners stood. A car approaclicd and slowed 
to the curb and shut off engine and lights, and in the 
tiered windows heads leaned, aureolcd against the 
lighted rooms behind, without individuality, feminine, 

distant, delicately and divinely young. 

They played “Home, Sweet Home, and when the 

rich minor died away, across to them came a clar 
ping of slender palms. Then Mitch sang “Good Night, 
Ladies” in his ti-ue, over-sweet tenor, and the young 
hands were more importunate, and they drove away 
the slender heads leaned aureolcd with 
the lighted windows and the soft clapping after 

them for a long while, fainter and fainter in the silver 

silence and the moon's infinitude. 

At the top of the first hill out of towm tW 
and Hub removed the breather-cap. Behind them ran 

148 



dom lights shone among the trees, and it was as though 
there still came to them across the hushed world that 
sound of young palms like flung delicate flowers before 
their masculinity and their youth, and they drank 
without speaking, lapped still in the fading magic of 
that lost moment. Mitch sang to himself softly ; the car 
slid purring on again. The road dropped curving 
smoothly, empty and blanched. Bayard spoke, his voice 
harsh, abrupt. 

“Cut-out, Hub,” he said. Hub bent forward and 
reached his hand under the dash, and the car swept on 
with a steady, leashed muttering like waking thun- 
derous wings ; then the road flattened in a long swoop 
toward another rise and the muttering leaped to cre- 
scendo and the car shot forward with neck-snapping 
violence. The negroes had stopped talking ; one of them 
raised a wailing shout. 

“Reno lost his hat,” Hub said, looking back. 

“He don’t need it,” Bayard replied. The car roared 
up this hill and rushed across the crest of it and flashed 
around a tight curve. 

“Oh, Lawd,” the negro wailed. “Mr. Bayard !” Tlie 
air-blast stripped his words away like leaves. “Lemme 
out, Mr. Bayard!” 

*‘Jump out, then,” Bayard answered. The rood fell 
from beneath them like a tilting floor, and away across 
a valley, straight now as a string. The negroes clutched 
their instruments and held to one another. The 
speedometer showed fifty-five and sixty and turned 
gradually on. Sparse houses flashed slumbering away, 
and fields and patches of woodland like tunnels. 

The road went on across the black and silver land. 
Wluppoorwills called on either side, one to another in- 
quiring, liquid reiterations ; now and then as the head- 

149 


lights swept in the road’s abrupt windings, two spots 
of pale fire blinked in the dust before them as the bird 
blundered awkwardly somewhere beneath the radiator. 
The ridge rose steadily, with wooded slopes falling 
away on either hand. Sparse negro cabins squatted on 
the slopes or beside the road. 

The road dipped, then rose again in a long slant 
broken by another dip; then it stood directly before 
them like a wall. The car shot upward and over the 
dip and left the road completely, then swooped dread- 
fully on, and the negroes’ concerted wail whipped for- 
lornly away. Then the ridge attained its crest and the 
car’s thunder ceased and it rolled to a stop. The negroes 
now sat in the bottom of the tonneau. 

“Is dis heaven?” one murmured after a time. 

“Dey wouldn’t let you in heaven, wid likker on yo’ 
breaf and no hat, feller,” another said. 

“Kf de Lawd don’t take no better keer of me dan 
He done of dat hat, I don’t wanter go dar, noways,” 
the first rejoined. 

“Mmmmmmm,” the second agreed, “when us come 
down dat ’ere las’ hill, dis yere cla’inet almos’ blowed 
clean outen my han’, let ’lone my hat.” 

“And when us jumped over dat ’ere lawg er whut- 
ever it wuz hack dar,” the third one added, “I thought 
fei* a minute dis whole auto’bile done blowed outen my 

han’.” 

They drank again. It was high here, and the air 
moved with grave coolness. On eitlier hand lay a val ey 
filled with silver mist and with whippoorwills; beyond 
these valleys the silver earth rolled on into the 
Across it, mournful and far, a dog howled. Bayara s 
head was as cool and clear as a clapperless bell. Within 
it that face emerged clearly at last: those two eyes 

150 


round with grave astonishment, winged serenely by two 
dark wings of hair. It w'as that Benbow girl, he said 
to himself, and he sat for a while, gazing into tlie sky. 
The lights on the town clock were steadfast and yellow 
and unw’inking in the dissolving distance, but in all 
other directions tlie world rolled away in slumbrous 
ridges, milkily opaline. 

Her appetite was gone at supper, and Aunt Sally 
Wyatt mouthed her soft prepared food and mumbled 
querulously at her because she wouldn’t eat. 

“My mother saw to it that I drank a good cup of 
bark tea when I come sulking to the table and w'ouldn’t 
eat,” Aunt Sally stated, “but folks nowadays think 
the good Lord’s going to keep ’em well and them lifting 
no finger.” 

“I’m all right,” Narcissa insisted. “I just don’t want 
any supper.” 

“That’s what you say. Let yourself get down, and 
Lord knows, I ain’t strong enough to wait on you. In 
my day young folks had more consideration for their 
elders.” She mouthed her food unprettily, querulously 
and monotonously retrospective, w’hile Narcissa toyed 
restively with the food she could not eat. Later Aunt 
Sally continued her monologue while she rocked with 
her interminable fancy-work on her lap. She would 
never divulge what it was to be when completed, nor 
for whom, and she had been working on it for fifteen 
years, carrying about with her a shapeless bag of dingy, 
threadbare brocade containing odds and ends of col- 
ored fabric in all possible shapes. She could never bring 
herself to trim them to any pattern; so she shifted and 
fitted and mused and fitted and shifted them like pieces 
of a patient puzzle-picture, trying to fit them to a pat- 

151 



tern or create a pattern about them without using her 
scissors ; smoothing her colored scraps with flaccid, 
putty-colored fingers, shifting and shifting them. From 
the bosom of her dress the needle Narcissa had threaded 
for her dangled its spidery skein. 

Across the room Narcissa sat with a book. Aunt 
Sally’s voice droned on with querulous interminability 
while Narcissa read. Suddenly she rose and laid the 
book down and crossed the room and entered the alcove 
where her piano sat. But she had not played four bars 
before her hands crashed in discord, and she shut the 
piano and went to tlie telephone. 

Miss Jenny thanked her tartly for her solicitude, and 
dared to say that Bayard was all right: still an active 
member of the so-called human race, that is, since they 
had received no official word from the coroner. No, 
she had heard nothing of him since Loosh Peabody 
’phoned her at four o’clock tliat Bayard was on his way 
home with a broken head. Xhe broken head slie readily 
believed, but the other part of the message she had put 
no credence in whatever, having lived with those 
Sartorises eighty years and knowing that home would 
be the last place in the world a Sartoris with a broken 
head would ever consider going. No, she was not even 
interested in his present whereabouts, and she hoped 
he hadn’t injured the horse. Horses were valuable 

animals. i • 

Narcissa returned to the living-room and explamea 

to Aunt Sally whom she had been talking to and why, 
and drew a low chair to the lamp and took up her 

book. . 

“Well,” Aunt Sally said after a time, if you am t 

going to talk any . . •” She fumbled her scraps to- 

15S 



gether and crammed them into the bag. “I thank the 
Lord sometimes you and Horace ain’t any blood of 
mine, the way you all go on. But if you’d drink it, I 
don’t know who’s to get sassafras for you : I ain’t able 
to, and you wouldn’t know it from dog fennel or mul- 
lein, yourself.” 

“I’m all right,” Narcissa protested. 

“Go ahead,” Aunt Sally repeated, “get flat on your 
back, with me and that trifling nigger to take care of 
you. She ain’t wiped off a picture frame in six months, 
to my certain knowledge. And I’ve done everything but 
beg and pray.” She rose and said good night and hob- 
bled from the room. Narcissa sat and turned the pages 
on, hearing the other mount the stairs with measured, 
laborious tappings of her stick, and for a while longer 
she sat and turned the pages of her book. 

But presently she flung the book away and went to 
the piano again, but Aunt Sally thumped on the floor 
overhead with her stick, and she desisted and returned 
to her book. So it was with actual pleasure that she 
greeted Dr. Alford a moment later. 

“I was passing and heard your piano,” he explained. 
“You haven’t stopped?” 

She explained that Aunt Sally had gone to bed, and 
he sat formally and talked to her in his stiff, pedantic 
way on cold and erudite subjects for two hours. Then 
he departed and she stood in the door and watched 
him down the drive. The moon stood overhead ; along 
the drive the cedars in a rigid curve were pointed 
against the pale, faintly spangled sky. 

She returned to the living-room and got her book 
and turned out the lights and mounted the stairs. 
A.cross the hall Aunt Sally snored with genteel 
placidity, and Narcissa stood for a moment, listening to 

15S 



the homely noise. “I will be glad when Horry gets 
home,” she thought, going on. 

She turned on her light and undressed and took her 
book to bed, where she again held her consciousness 
submerged deliberately, as you hold a puppy under 
water until its struggles cease. And after a time her 
mind surrendered to the book and she read on, pausing 
from time to time to think warmly of sleep, reading 
again. And so when the negroes first blended their 
instruments beneath the window she paid them only 
the most perfunctory notice. “Why in the w'orld are 
those jelly-beans serenading me.^” she thought with 
faint amusement, visioning immediately Aunt Sally in 
her night-cap leaning from a window and shouting 
them away. And she lay with tlie book open, seeing 
upon the spread page the picture she had created wliile 
the plaintive rhythm of the strings and clarinet drifted 
into the open w'indow. 

Then she sat bolt upright, with a sharp and utter 
certainty, and clapped the book shut and slipped from 
bed. From the adjoining room she looked down. 

The negroes were grouped on the lawn: the frosted 
clarinet, tiie guitar, the sober, comical bulk of the bass 
fiddle. At the street entrance to the drive a motor-car 
stood in shadow. The musicians played once; then a 
voice called from the car, and they retreated across 
the lawn and the car moved away, without lights, bne 
was certain, then: no one else would play one tune 
beneath a lady’s window, just enough to waken her 


from sleep, then go away. , , , , 

She returned to her room. The book lay face d 
upon the bed, but she went to the window and stood 
there, between the parted curtains, looking "P®" 
the black-and-silver world and the peaceful night. 


154 


air moved upon her face and amid tlie dark> fallen 
wings of her hair with grave coolness. “The beast, the 
beast,” she whispered to herself. She let the curtains 
fall and on her silent feet she descended the stairs 
again and found the telephone in the darkness, muf- 
fling its bell when she rang. 

Miss Jenny’s voice came out of the night with its 
usual brisk and cold asperity, and without surprise or 
curiosity. No, he had not returned home, for he was 
by now safely locked up in jail, she believed, unless the 
city officers were too corrupt to obey a lady’s request. 
Serenading? Fiddlesticks. What would he want to go 
serenading for? He couldn’t injure himself serenading, 
unless some one killed him with a flatiron or an alarm 
clock. And why was she concerned about him? 

Narcissa hung up, and for a moment she stood in 
the darkness, beating her fists on the telephone’s un- 
responsive box. The beast, the beast. 

She received three - callers that night. One came 

formally ; the second came informally ; the third came 
anonymously. 

The garage which sheltered her car w'as a small 

brick building surrounded by evergreens. One side of it 

was a continuation of the garden wall. Beyond the wall 

a grass-grown lane led back to another street. The 

garage was about fifteen yards from the house and its 

roof rose to the level of the first-floor windows: Nar- 

cissas Wroom windows looked out upon the slate 
roof of it. 

This third caller entered by the lane and mounted 
on to the wall and thence to the garage roof, where he 
now lay in the shaJow of a cedar, sheltered so from the 
moon. He had lam there for a long time. The 

155 


room 


facing him was dark when he arrived, but he had lain 
in his fastness quiet as an animal and with an animal’s 
patience, without movement save to occasionally raise 
his head and reconnoiter the immediate scene with 

covert dartings of his e3^es. 

But the room facing him remained dark while an 
hour passed. In the meantime a car entered the drive 
(he recognized it; he knew every car in town) and a 
man entered the house. The second hour passed and 
the room was still dark, and the car stood yet in the 
drive. Then the man emerged and drove away, and a 
moment later tiie lights downstairs went out, and then 
the window facing him glowed, and through the sl^®^ 
curtains he saw l>er moving about the room, watched 
the shadowy motions of her disrobing. Then she passed 
out of his vision. But the light still burned and he lay 
with still and infinite patience; lay so while another 
hour passed and another car stopped before house 

and three men carrying an awkwardly-shaped burden 

came up the drive and stood in the moonlight beneath 

tl.e window; lay so until they played ^ T** 

away. When they had gone, she came to the 

and parted the curtains and stood for a ^ 

dark fallen wings of her hair, looking directly into his 

Then the curtains fell again, and once more she wM 
a shadowy movement beyond them. Then the lig i w 
off, and he lay face downward upon the steep 
the roof, utterly motionless for a long time, darting 

from beneath his hidden face covert, ceaseless glances, 
quick and darting, all-embracing as those of an animal. 


To Narcissa’s home they came finally. 
visited the dark homes of all the other unmarried girls 


166 


one by one and sat in the car while the negroes stood 
on the lawn with their blended instruments. Heads had 
appeared at darkened windows, sometimes lights went 
up; once they were invited in, but Hub and Mitch hung 
diffidently back ; once refreshment was sent out to them ; 
once they were heartily cursed by a young man who 
happened to be sitting with the young lady on the dark 
veranda. In the meantime they had lost the breather- 
cap, and as they moved from house to house, all six of 
them drank fraternally from the jug, turn and turn 
about. At last they reached the Benbow’s and played 
once beneath the cedars. There was a light yet in one 
window, but none came to it. 

The moon stood well down the sky. Its light was 
now a cold silver on things, spent and a little wearied, 
and the world was empty as they rplled without lights 
along a street lifeless and fixed in black and silver as 
any street in the moon itself. Beneath stippled inter- 
mittent shadows they went, passed quiet intersections 
dissolving away, occasionally a car motionless at the 
curb before a house. A dog crossed the street ahead of 
them trotting, and went on across a lawn and so from 
sight, but saving this there was no movement anywhere. 

The square opened spaciously about the absinthe- 
cloudy moss of elms that surrounded the courthouse. 
Among them the round spaced globes were more like 
huge, pallid grapes than ever. Above the exposed vault 
in each bank burned a single bulb ; inside the hotel 
lobby, before which a row of cars was aligned, another 
burned. Other lights there were none. 

They circled the courthouse, and a shadow moved 
new the hotel door and detached itself from shadow 
and came to the curb, a white shirt glinting within a 
spread coat; and as the car swung slowly toward an- 

« 157 


other street, the man hailed them. Bayard stopped and 
the man came through the blanched dust and laid his 
hand on the door. 

“Hi, Buck,” Mitch said. “You’re up pretty late, 
ain’t you.?” 

The man had a sober, good-natured horse’s face. He 
wore a metal star on his unbuttoned waistcoat. His coat 
humped slightly over his hip. “What you boys doin’?” 

he asked. “Been to a dance?” 

“Serenading,” Bayard answered. “Want a drink, 


Buck?” 

“No, much obliged.” He stood with his hand on the 
door, gravely and good-naturedly serious. “Ain t you 

fellers out kind of late, yo’selves?” 

“It is gettin’ on,” Mitch agreed. The marshal hfted 
his foot to the running-board. Beneath his hat hb eyes 
were in shadow. “We’re going home now,” 

The other pondered quietly, and Bayard added. 
“Sure; we’re on our way home now.” 

The marshal moved his head slightly and spoke to 
the negroes. “I reckon you boys are about ready to 

turn in, ain’t you?” , j xu ♦ 

“Yes, suh,” the negroes answered, and l^hey. got out 

and lifted the viol out. Bayard gave Reno a bill and 

they thanked him and said good night and picked up 

the viol and departed quietly down a side street. Ihe 

marshal turned his head again. 

“Ain’t that yo’ car in front of Rogers cafe, Mitchf 

he asked. , , • « 

“Reckon so. That’s where I left it. 

“Well, suppose you run Hub out home, lessen ne 
goin’ to stay in town tonight. Bayard better come with 


me. 


“Aw, hell. Buck,” Mitch protested. 

158 


“What for?” Bayard demanded. 

“His folks are worried about him,” the other an- 
swered. “They ain’t seen hide nor hair of him since that 
stallion throwed him. Where’s yo’ bandage, Bayard?” 

“Took it off,” he answered shortly. “See here. Buck, 
we’re going to put Mitch out and then Hub and me 
are going straight home.” 

“You been on yo’ way home ever since fo’ o’clock, 
Bayard,” the marshal replied soberly, “but you don’t 
seem to git no nearer there. I reckon you better come 
with me tonight, like yo’ aunt said.” 

“Did Aunt Jenny tell you to arrest me?” 

“They was worried about you, son. Miss Jenny just 
phoned and asked me to kind of see if you was all right 
until mawnin’. So I reckon we better. You ought to 
went on home this evenin’.” 

“Aw, have a heart, Buck,” Mitch protested. 

“I ruther make Bayard mad than Miss Jenny,” the 
other answered patiently. “You boys go on, and Bayard 
better come with me.” 

Mitch and Hub got out and Hub lifted out his jug 
and they said good night and went on to where Mitch’s 
car stood before the resUurant. The marshal got in 
beside Bayard. The jail was not far. It loomed pres- 
ently above its walled court, square and implacable, its 
shtted upper windows brutal as saber-blows. They 
turned into an alley, and the marshal descended and 
opened a gate, and Bayard drove into the grassless and 
littered compound and stopped while the other went 
on anead to a small garage in which stood a Ford. He 
backed this out and motioned Bayard forward. The 
gar^ WM built to the Ford’s dimensions and about a 

km car stuck out the door of it. 

Better’n nothin’, though,” the marshal said. “Come 

159 


on.” They entered through tlie kitchen, into the jail- 
keeper’s living-quarters, and Bayard waited in a dark 
passage until the other found a light. Then he entered 
a bleak, neat room, containing spare conglomerate 
furnishings and a few scattered articles of masculine 
apparel. 

“Say,” Bayard objected, “aren’t you giving me 
your bed?” 

“Won’t need it befo’ mawnin’,” the other answered. 
“You’ll be gone, then. Want me to he’p you off with 


yo’ clothes?” 

“No. I’m all right.” Then, more graciously: Good 

night. Buck. And much obliged.” 

“Good night,” the marshal answered. 

He closed the door behind him and Bayard removed 
his coat and shoes and his tie and snapped the light 
off and lay on the bed. Moonlight seeped into the room 
impalpably, refracted and sourceless; the night was 
without any sound. Beyond the window a cornice rose 
in a succession of shallow steps against the opaline and 

dimensionless sky. His head clear 

whisky he had drunk was completely dead. Or rather, 

it was as though his head were one 

a strange bed and whose alcohol-dulled nerves radiat^ 
like threads of ice through that body which he must 
draff forever about a bleak and barren world with him. 
‘‘nfll,” he said, lying on his back, staring Jhe 
do* where nothing was to be seen, waiting for sl^P, 
not knowing if it would come or no^ not caring a pa 
ticular damn either way. Nothing to ^ s^n and^th^ 

SeSa^rto dt; aTubb^™ hi Ibout the world 
Tnd coil its iLutent demands. Three score and ten. 
the^Bible said. Seventy years, he was only ^enty 
siL Not much more than a third through it. HeU. 

160 



PART THREE 


Horace Benbow in liis clean, wretchedly-fitting khaki 
which but served to accentuate liis air of fine and deli- 
cate futility, and laden with an astonishing impedi- 
menta of knapsacks and kit bags and paper-wrapped 
parcels, got off the two-thirty train. Across the tiglit 
clotting of descending and ascending passengers tlie 
sound of his spoken name reached him, and he roved 
his distraught gaze, like a somnambulist rousing to 
avoid traffic, about the agglomerate faces. “Hello, 
hello,” he said; then he thrust himself clear and laid 
his bags and parcels on the edge of the platform and 

moved with intent haste up the train toward the bag- 
gage car. 

“Horace!” his sister called again, running after him. 

The station agent emerged from his office and stopped 

him and held him like a finely-bred restive horse and 

shook his hand, and thus his sister overtook him. 

He turned at her voice and came completely from out 

ms distraction and swept her up in his arms until 

her feet were off the ground, and kissed her on the 
mouth. 

“Dear old Narcy,” he said, kissing her again. Then 
he set her down and stroked his hands on her face, as 
a child would. “Dear old Narcy,” he repeated, touch- 

161 


ing her face with his fine spatulate hands, gazing at 
her as though he were drinking that constant serenity 
of hers through his eyes. He continued to say “Dear 
old Narcy,” stroking his hands on her face, utterly 
oblivious of his surroundings until she recalled him. 

“Where in the world are you going, up this way?” 

Then he remembered, and released her and rushed 
on, she following, and stopped again at the door of the 
baggage car, from which the station porter and a train 
hand were taking trunks and boxes as the baggage 
clerk tilted them out. 

“Can’t you send down for it?” she asked. But he 
stood peering into the car, oblivious of her again. The 
two negroes returned and he stepped aside, still looking 
into the car with peering, birdlike motions of his head. 
“Let’s send back for it,” his sister said again. 

“What.? Oh. I’ve seen it every time I changed caM, 
he told her, completely forgetting the sense 
words. “It’d be rotten luck to have it go astray right 
at my doorstep, wouldn’t it?” Again the negroes moved 
away with a trunk, and he stepped forward again and 
peered into the car. “That’s just about what hap^ned 
to it; some clerk forgot to put it on the tram at M— 
there it is,” he interrupted himself. Easy now. Cap, 
he called in the country idiom, in a fever of alarm as 
the clerk slammed into the doorway a box of foreign 
shape stenciled with a military address ; “she’s got glass 


“AU right. Colonel,” the baggage clerk agreed. “We 
ain’t hurt her none, I reckon. » we ^ve, “U you got 
to do is sue us.” The two negroes backed up to the ?o^ 
and Horace laid his hands on the box as the clerk tilted 


“E^^^now, boys,” he repeated nervously, and he 

162 


trotted beside them as they crossed to the platform. 
“Set it down easy, now. Here, sis, lend a hand, will 
you 

“We got it all right, Cap’m,” the station porter said ; 
“we ain’t gwine drop it.” But Horace continued to dab 
at it with his hands, and when they set it down he leaned 
his ear to it. 

“Slie’s all right, ain’t she.'*” the station porter asked. 

“It’s all right,” the train porter assured him. He 
turned away. “Le’s go,” he called. 

“I think it’s all right,” Horace agreed, his ear 
against the box. “I don’t hear anything. It’s packed 
pretty well.” The engine whistled and Horace sprang 
erect, and digging into his pocket he ran towa.*d the 
moving cars. The porter was closing the vestibule, but 
he leaned down to Horace’s hand, then straightened up 
and touched his cap. Horace returned to his box and 
gave another cfi'm to the second negro. “Put it in the 
house for me, careful, now,” he directed. “I’ll be back 
for it in a few minutes.” 

Yes, suh, Mr. Benbow. I’ll look out fer it.” 

“I thought it was lost, once,” Horace confided, slip- 
ping his arm within his sister’s, and they moved toward 
her car. “It was delayed at Brest and didn’t come until 
the next boat. I had the first outfit I bought— a small 
one--with me, and I pretty near lost that one, too. I 
was blowing a small one in my cabin on the boat one 
day, when the whole thing, cabin and all, took fire. The 
capUin decided that I’d better not try it again until 
we got ashore, what with all the men on board. The 
vase turned out pretty well, though,” he babbled, 
lovely httle thing. I’m catching on; I really am. 
Venice. A voluptuous dream, a little sinister. Must take 
you there some day.” Then he squeezed her arm and 

163 


fell to repeating “Dear old Narcy,” as though the 
homely sound of the nickname on his tongue was a taste 
he loved and had not forgotten. A few people still 
lingered about the station. Some of them spoke to him 
and he stopped to shake their hands, and a marine 
private with the Second Division Indian head on his 
shoulder, remarked the triangle on Horace’s sleeve and 
made a vulgar sound of derogation through his pursed 
lips. 

“Howdy, buddy,” Horace said, turning upon him 
his shy startled gaze. 

“Evenin’, General,” the marine answered. He spat, 
not exactly at Horace’s feet, and not exactly anywhere 
else. Narcissa clasped her brother’s arm against her 
side. 

“Do come on home and get into some decent clothes,” 
she said in a lower tone, hurrying him along. 

“Get out of uniform?” he said. “I rather fancied 
myself in khaki,” he added, a little hurt. “You really 
think I am ridiculous in this.^” 

“Of course not,” she answered immediately, squeez- 
ing his hand. ‘*Of course not. I’m sorry I said that. You 
wear your uniform just as long as you want to.” 

“It’s a good uniform,” he said soberly. “I don’t mean 
this,” he said, gesturing toward the symbol on his arm. 
They went on. “People will realize that in about ten 
years, when noncombatants’ hysteria has worn itself 
out and the individual soldiers realize that the A.E.F. 
didn’t invent disillusion.” 

“What did it invent?” she asked, holding his arm 
against her, surrounding him with the fond, inattentive 
serenity of her affection. 

“God knows. . . . Dear old Narcy,” he said again, 

164 



and they crossed the platform toward her car. “So you 
have dulled your palate for khaki.” 

“Of course not,” she repeated, shaking his arm a 
little as she released it. “You wear it just as long as 
you want to.” She opened the car door. Some one called 
after them and they looked back and saw tlie porter 
trotting after them with Horace’s hand-luggage, which 
he had walked off and left lying on the platform. 

“Oh, Lord,” he exclaimed, “I worry with it for four 
thousand miles, then lose it on my own doorstep. Much 
obliged, Sol.” The porter stowed the things in the car. 

That s the first outfit I got,” Horace added to his 
sister, “and the vase I blew on shipboard. I’ll show it 
to you when we get home.” 

His sister got in under the wheel. “Wliere are vour 
clothes? In the box?” 


“Haven’t any. Had to throw most of ’em away to 
njake room for the other things. No room for anything 

•fu i. *nd looked at him for a moment 

wth fond exasperation. “What’s the matter he asked 
innocently. “Forgot something yourself?” 

^No. Get in. Aunt Sally’s waiting to see you.” 

Tliey drove on and mounted the shady gradual hill 
toward the square, and Horace looked about happily 
on familiar scenes. Sidings with freight cars; the plat- 
form which in the fall would be laden «-ith cotton bales 
in serned rotund ranks ; the town power plant, a brick 
building from which there came a steady, unbroken 
humming and about which in the spring gnarled 
heaven-trees s^ng ragged lilac bloom against the 

Itr^t “ ''“y cut-bank. Then a 

houses with a minimum of lawn, homes built by fountry- 
bred people and set close to the street after the country 

'• 165 


fashion ; occasionally a house going up on a lot which 
had been vacant sixteen months ago wlien he went away. 
Then other streets opened away beneath arcades of 
green, shadier, with houses a little older and more 
imposing as they got away from the station’s vicinity; 
and pedestrians, usually dawdling negro boys at this 
hour or old men bound townward after their naps, to 
spend the afternoon in sober, futile absorptions. 

The liill flattened away into the plateau on which 
the town proper had been built these hundred years and 
more ago, and the street became definitely urban pres- 
ently with garages and small shops with merchants in 
shirt sleeves7and customers; the picture show with its 
lobby plastered with life episodic in colored litho- 
graphed mutations. Then the square, with its unbroken 
low’ skyline of old weathered brick and fading dead 
names stubborn yet beneath scaling paint, and drifting 
negroes in casual and careless O.D. garments worn by 
both sexes, and country people in occasional khaki too; 
and the brisker urbanites weaving among their placid 
cliewing unliaste and among the men in tilted chairs 
before the stores. 

The courthouse was of brick too, with stone arches 
rising amid elms, and among the trees the monument 
of the Confederate soldier stood, his musket at order 
arms, shading his carven eyes with his stone hand* 
Beneath the porticoes of the courthouse and on benches 
about the green, the city fathers sat and talked and 
drowsed, in uniform too, here and there. But it was the 
gray of Old Jack and Beauregard and Joe Johnston, 
and they sat in a grave sedateness of minor political 
sinecures, smoking and spitting, about checkerboar s. 
When the weather ^ bad they moved inside to the 

circuit clerk’s office. 


166 



It was here that the young men loafed also, pitching 
dollars or tossing baseballs back and forth or lying on 
the grass until the young girls in their little colored 
dresses and cheap nostalgic perfume should come troop- 
ing down town through the late afternoon, to the drug 
store. When the weather was bad tliese young men 
loafed in the drug stores or in the barber shop. 

“Lots of uniforms yet,” Horace remarked. “All be 
home by June. Have the Sartoris boys come home yet?” 

“John is dead,” his sister answered. “Didn’t vou 
know?” ^ 


he answered quickly, with swift concern. 
Poor old Bayard. Rotten luck they have. Funny 

kiM. And young Bayard’s wife died, you wrote me.” 

® automobile 

fr -f" ^ tearing around the country 

himLin^ tt.” hear he’s killed 

j “g“'"= “Poor old 

^lonel. He used to hate an automobile like a snake 
Wonder what he thinks about it.” 

“He goes with him.” 

“What? Old Bayard in a motor-car?” 

Yes. Miss Jenny says it’s to keep Bayard from 
turning it over. But she says Colonel LrtoHs doesn^ 

No. ft.,.. , .W hot: 

167 



But she didn’t answer. She turned into another street 
bordered by negro stores of one story and shaded by 
metal awnings beneath which negroes lounged, skin- 
ning bananas or small florid cartons of sweet biscuits; 
and then a grist mill driven by a spasmodic gasoline 
engine. It oozed chaff and a sifting dust, motelike in 
the sun, and above the door a tediously hand-lettered 
sign : w. c. beards mill. Between it and a shuttered 
and silent gin draped with feathery soiled festoons of 
lint, an anvil clanged at the end of a short lane filled 
with wagons and horses and mules and shaded by mul- 
berry trees beneath which countrymen in overalls 
squatted. 

“He ought to have more consideration for the old 
fellow than that,” Horace said fretfully. “Still, they’ve 
just gone tlirough with an experience that pretty well 
shook the verities and the humanities, and wliether they 
know it or not, they’ve got another one ahead of ’em 
that’ll pretty well finish the business. Give him a little 
time. . . . But personally I can’t see why he shouldn’t 
be allowed to kill himself, if that’s what he thinks he 

wants. Sorry for Miss Jenny, though.” ^ 

“Yes,” his sister agreed, quietly again. “They re 
worried about Colonel Sartoris’ heart, too. Everybody 
is except him and Bayard, that is. I’m glad I have you 
instead of one of those Sartorises, Horry.” She laid 
her hand quickly and lightly on his thin knee. 

“bear old Narcy,” he said. Then his face clouded 
again. “Damn scoundrel,” he said. “Well, its their 

trouble. How’s Aunt Sally been P , , v 

“All right.” And then : “I am glad you re home, 

^The shabby small shops were behind and now the 
street opened away between old shady lawns, spacious 

168 



and quiet. These homes were quite old, in appearance 
at least, and set well back from the street and its dust, 
they emanated a gracious and benign peace, steadfast 
as a windless afternoon in a world without motion or 
sound. Horace looked about him and drew a lone 
breath. 

“Perhaps this is the reason for wars,” he said. “The 
meaning of peace.” 


They turned into an intersecting street, narrower 
but more sliady and even quieter, with a golden Arca- 
dian drowse, and turned through a gate in a honey- 
suckle-covered fence of iron pic&ts. From the gate the 
cinder-packed drive rose in a grave curve between 
cedars. The cedars had been set out by an English 
architect of the »40’s, who had built the house (with 
the minor concession of a veranda) in the funereal light 
Tudor which the young Victoria had sanctioned; and 
beneath and among them, even on the brightest days, 
lay a resinous exhilarating gloom. Mocking-birds loved 
them, and catbirds, and thrushes demurely mellifluous 
m the late afternoon; but the grass beneath them was 

sparse or nonexistent, and there were no insects save 
nreflies in the dusk. 


ascended to the house and curved before 
It and deseeded again to the street in an unbroken arc 
of cedars. Within the arc rose a lone oak, broad and 
huge and low; around its trunk ran a wooden bench. 
About tins half-moon of lawn and without the arc of 
the drive were bridal wreath and crape myrtle bushes 
old as time and huge as age would make them. Big as 
tr^s they were, and in one fence corner was an aston- 
ishing clump of stunted banana palms and in the other 
a lantana with its clotted wounds, which Francis Ben- 

169 



bow had brought home from Barbados in a top-hat box 
in ’71. 

About the oak and from the funereal scimitar of the 
drive descending, lawn flowed streetward with good 
sward broken by random clumps of jonquils and nar- 
cissi and gladioli. Originally the lawn was in terraces 
and the flowers a formal bed on the first terrace. Then 
Will Benbow, Horace’s and Narcissa’s father, had had 
the terraces obliterated. It w£is done with plows and 
scrapers and seeded anew with grass, and he had sup- 
posed the flower bed destroyed. But the next spring 
the scattered bulbs sprouted again, and now every year 
the lawn was stippled with bloom in yellow, white, and 
pink without order. A certain few young girls asked 
and received permission to pick some of them each 
spring, and neighbors’ children played quietly among 
them and beneath the cedars. At the top of the drive, 
where it curved away descending again, sat the brick 
doll’s house in which Horace and Narcissa lived, sur- 
rounded always by that cool, faintly astringent odor 
of cedar trees. 

It was trimmed with white and it had mullioned 
casements brought out from England; along the ver- 
anda eaves and above the door grew a wistaria vine like 
heavy tarred rope and tliicker than a man’s wrist. The 
lower casements stood open on gently billowing cur- 
tains ; on the sill you expected to see a scrubbed wooden 
bowl, or at least an immaculate and supercilious cat. 
But the window sill held only a wdeker work-basket 
from which, like a drooping poinsettia, spilled an end 
of patchwork in crimson and white; and in the doorway 
Aunt Sally, a potty little woman in a lace cap, leaned 

on a gold-headed ebony w'alking-stick. 

Just as it should be, and Horace turned and looked 

170 



back at his sister crossing the drive with the parcels 
he had forgotten again. 


He banged and splashed happily in his bathroom, 
shouting through the door to his sister where she sat 
on his bed. His discarded khaki lay on a chair, holding 
yet through long association, in its harsh drab folds, 
something of that taut and delicate futility of his. On 
the marble-topped dresser lay the crucible and tubes 
of his glass-blowing outfit, the first one he had bought, 
and beside it the vase he had blown on shipboard — a 
small chaste shape in clear glass, not four inches tall, 
fragile as a silver lily and incomplete* 

They work in caves,” lie was shouting through the 
door, “down flights of stairs underground. You feel 
water seeping under your foot while you’re reaching 
for the next step; and when you put your hand out 
to steady yourself against the wall, it’s wet when you 
take It away. It feCls just like blood.” 

“Horace !” 


All And ’way ahead you see the glow. 

All of a sudden the tunnel comes glimmering out of 

nothing; then you see the furnace, with things rising 
and faUmg before it, shutting off the light, and the 
waUs go glimmering again. At first they’re just shape- 
less things hunching about. Antic, with shadows on the 
bWdy walls red shadows. A glare, and black shapes 
nf * weaAung and rising and falling in front 

® shutter. And then a face 

mes out, blowing, and other faces sort of swell out 

« A® 7“^ baUoons. 

beai^ft/^'T themselves. Sheerly and tragically 

^ inri;iat * you know. Macabre 

and inviolate; purged and purified as bronze, yet 

171 



fragile as soap bubbles. Sound of pipes crystallized. 
Flutes and oboes, but mostly reeds. Oaten reeds. Damn 
it, they bloom like flowers right before your eyes. Mid- 
summer Night’s Dream to a salamander.” His voice 
became unintelligible, soaring into measured phr£ises 
wliich she did not recognize, but which from the pitch 
of his voice she knew to be Milton’s archangels in their 
sonorous plunging ruin. 

He emerged at last, in a white shirt and serge trou- 
sers, but still borne aloft on his flaming verbal wings, 
and while Ins voice chanted in measured syllables she 
fetched a pair of shoes from the closet, and while she 
stood liolding the shoes in her hands he ceased chanting 
and touched her face again with his hands after that 
fashion of a child. 

At supper Aunt Sally broke into his staccato bab- 
bling: “Did you bring your Snopes back with you?” 
she asked. This Snopes was a young man, member of 
a seemingly inexhaustible family which for the last ten 
years had been moving to town in driblets from a small 
settlement known as Frenchman’s Bend. Flem, the 
first Snopes, had appeared unheralded one day behind 
the counter of a small restaurant on a side street, 
patronized by country folk. W^ith this foothold and 
like Abraham of old, he brought his blood and l^w 
kin household by household, individual by indi^dual, 
into town, and esUblished them where they could gam 
money. Flem himself was presently manager of the city 
light and water plant, and for the following few years 
he was a sort of handy man to the municipal govern- 
ment; and three years ago, to old Bayard’s profane 
astonishment and unconcealed annoyance, he became 
vice president of the Sartoris bank, where already a 
relation of his was a bookkeeper. 

172 



He still retained the restaurant, and the canvas tent 
in the rear of it, in which he and his wife and baby Iiad 
passed the first few months of their residence in town ; 
and it served as an alighting-place for incoming 
Snopeses, from which they spread to small third-rate 
businesses of various kinds — grocery stores, barber- 
shops (there was one, an invalid of some sort, who oper- 
ated a second-hand peanut roaster) — where they multi- 
plied and flourished. The older residents from their 
Jeffersonian houses and genteel stores and offices, 
iTOked on with amusement at first. But this was long 
since become something like consternation. 

The Snopes to which Aunt Sally referred was named 
Montgomery Ward, and just before the draft law went 
into operation in T7 he applied to a recruiting officer 
in Memphis and was turned down for military service 
because of his heart. Later, to every one’s surprise, 
particularly that of Horace Benbow’s friends, he de- 
parted with Horace to a position in the Y.M.C.A. Later 
stiU, it was told of liim that he had traveled all the way 
to Memphis on that day when he had offered for serv- 
ice, wth a plug of chewing tobacco beneath his left 

ampit. But he and his patron were already departed 
when that story got out. 

“Did you bring your Snopes back with you ?” Aunt 
bally asked. 

“Noy’ he answered, and his thin, nerve-sick face 
clouded over ^th a fine cold distaste. “I was very much 
disappoint^ in him. I don’t even care to talk about it.” 

A >iave told you that when you left.” 

Aunt Sally chew^ slowly and steadily above her plate. 

Horace brooded for a moment; his thin hand tightened 
slowly upon his fork. 


173 



” he began, 


“It’s individuals like that, parasites 
but his sister interrupted. 

“Who cares about an old Snopes, anyway? Besides, 
it’s too late at night to talk about the horrors of war.” 

Aunt Sally made a moist sound through her food, 
a sound of vindicated superiority. 

“It’s the generals they have nowadays,” she said. 
“General Johnston or General Forrest wouldn’t have 
took a Snopes in his army at all.” Aunt Sally was no 
relation whatever. She lived next door but one with 
two maiden sisters, one younger and one older than 
she. She had been in and out of the house ever since 
Horace and Narcissa could remember, having arrogated 
to herself certain rights in their lives before they could 
walk ; privileges which w’cre never definitely expressed 
and of which she never availed herself, yet the mutual 
admission of whose existence she never permitted to fall 
into abeyance. She would walk into any room in the 
house unannounced, and she liked to talk tediously and 
a little tactlessly of Horace’s and Narcissa’s infantile 
ailments. It was said that she had once “made eyes” 
at Will Benbow, although she was a woman of thirty- 
four or -five when Will married ; and she still spoke of 
him with a faintly disparaging possessiveness, and of 
his wife she always spoke pleasantly too. “Julia was a 
right sweet-natured girl,” she would say. 

So when Horace went off to the war Aunt Sally 
moved over to keep Narcissa company: no other ar- 
rangement had ever occurred to any of the three of 
them ; the fact that Narcissa must have Aunt Sally m 
the house for an indefinite year or two or three appear^ 
as unavoidable as the fact that Horace must go to the 
war. Aunt Sally was a good old soul, but she lived much 
in the past, shutting her mind with a bland finality to 

174 



anything which had occurred since 1901. For her, time 
had gone out drawn by horses, and into her stubborn 
and placid vacuum the squealing of automobile brakes 
had never penetrated. She had a lot of the crudities 
which old people are entitled to. She liked the sound 
of her own voice and she didn’t like to be alone at any 
time, and as she had never got accustomed to the false 
teeth which she had bought twelve years ago and so 
never touched them other than to change weekly the 
water in which they reposed, she ate unprettily of un- 
prepossessing but easily malleable foods. 

Narcissa reached her hand beneath the table and 
touched her brother’s knee again. “I am glad you’re 
home, Horry.” 

He looked at her quickly, and the cloud faded from 
his fare M suddenly as it had come, and his spirit 
slipped, hke a swimmer into a tideless sea, into the 
serene constancy of her affection again. 


He was a lawyer, principally through a sense of duty 
to the fa|mly tradition, and though he had no particu- 
lar a^ity to It other than a love for printed words, 
for the dwelling-places of books, he contemplated 
returning to his musty office with a glow of . . . not 
eagerness, no ^f deep and abiding unreluctance, almost 

dlvs-*““'’-‘ peace. Old unchanging 

days unwinged perhaps, but undisastrous, too. You 

n t see it, feel it, save with perspective. Fireflies had 

not yet come, and the cedars flowed unbroken on either 

hand doTO to the street, like a curving ebony w^ve witt 

oIftlrffto“m th d 

W of c ^ V. ® window, across the porch and on a 
M of cannas, hardy, bronzelike— none of your flower- 

ragibty, theirs ; and within the room Aunt Sally’s 

175 



quavering monotone. Narcissa was there too, beside 
the lamp with a book, filling the room with her still and 
constant presence like the odor of jasmine, watching 
the door through which he had passed; and Horace 
stood on the veranda with his cold pipe, surrounded 
by that cool astringency of cedars like another pres- 
ence. “The meaning of peace,” he said to himself once 
more, releasing the grave words one by one within the 
cool bell of silence into which he had come at last again, 
hearing them linger with a dying fall pure as silver 
and crystal struck lightly together. 

“How’s Belle?” he asked on the evening of his arrival. 

“They’re all right,” his sister answered. “They have 
a new car.” 

“Dare say,” Horace agreed with detachment. “The 
war should certainly have accomplished that much.” 

Aunt Sally had left them at last and tapped her slow 
bedward way. Horace stretched his serge legs luxuri- 
ously, and for a while he ceased striking matches to 
his stubborn pipe and sat watching his sister’s dark 
head bent above the magazine upon her knees, lost from 
lesser and inconstant things. Her hair was smoother 
than any reposing wings, sweeping with burnished un- 
rebellion to a simple knot low in her neck. ^ 

“Belle’s a rotten correspondent,” he said. “Like all 

women.” 

She turned a page, without looking up. 

^Did you write to her often?” 

“It’s because they realize that letters are only g<^ 
to bridge intervals between actions, like the interludes 
in Shakespeare’s plays,” he went on, oblivious. “And 
did you ever know a woman who read Shakespeare 
without skipping the interludes? Shakespeare himself 

176 


knew that, so he didn’t put any women in the inter- 
ludes. Let the men bombast to one another’s echoes 
while the ladies are backstage washing the dinner dishes 
or putting tlie children to bed.” 

“I never knew a woman that read Shakespeare at 
all,” Narcissa corrected. “He talks too much.” 

Horace rose and stood above her and patted her dark 
head. 

“O profundity,” he said, “you have reduced all wis- 
dom to a phrase, and measured your sex by the stature 
of a star.” 

Well, they don’t,” she repeated, raising her face. 

l^key.J*” He struck another match 
to his pipe, watching her across his cupped hands as 
gmvely and with poised eagerness, like a striking bird. 

Your Arlens and Sabatinis talk a lot, and nobody 

ever had more to say and more trouble saying it than 
old Dreiser.” 


“But they have secrets,” she explained. “Shakespeare 
doesn t have any secrets. He tells everything.” 

^ * X ^ no sense of discrimination 

and no instinct for reticence. In other words, he wasn’t 
a gentleman,” he suggested. 

’ ‘ * ^ mean.” 

^ And so, to be a gentleman, you must have secrets.” 

zine^i’n/r "If ‘"-ed.” She returned to her maga- 
ine and he sat beside her on the couch and took Lr 

wild hTir^'* “P°" hi® 


“The Lw garden,” he said. 

all of T "'®ht, but you know 

nd sort of stop and turn over a leaf occasionally, a 

177 



leaf you hadn’t noticed before; perhaps you find a 
violet under it, or a bluebell or a lightning bug; per- 
haps only another leaf or a blade of grass. But there’s 
always a drop of dew on it.” He continued to stroke 
her hand upon his face. With her other hand she turned 
the magazine slowly on, listening to him with fond and 
serene detachment. 

“Did you write to Belle often?” she repeated. “What 
did you say to her?” 

“I wrote what she wanted to read. What all women 
want in letters. People are really entitled to half of 
what they think they should have.” 

“WTiat did you tell her?” Narcissa persisted, turn- 
ing the pages slowly, her passive hand in his, following 
the stroking movement of his. 

told her I was unhappy. Perhaps I was,” he 
added. His sister freed her hand quietly and laid it on 
the page. He said: 

“I admire Belle. She’s so cannily stupid. Once I 
feared her. Perhaps . . . No, I don’t. I am immune to 
destruction : I have a magic. Which is a good sign that 
I am due for it, say the sages,” he added. “But then, 
acquired wisdom is a dry thing; it has a way of crum- 
bling to dust where a sheer and blind coursing of stupid 
sap is impervious.” He sat without touching her, in 
rapt and instantaneous repose, “Not like yours, O 
Serene,” he said, waking again. Then he fell to saying 
“Dear old Narcy,” and again he took her hand. It did 
not withdraw; neither did it wholly surrender. 

“I don’t think you ought to say I’m dull so often, 

Horry,” she said. 

“Neither do I,” he agr^d. “But I must take some 

sort of revenge on perfection.” 

Later she lay in her dark room. Across the corridor 

178 


Aunt Sally snored with placid regularity ; in the ad- 
joining room Horace lay while that wild, fantastic 
futility of his voyaged in lonely regions of its own 
beyond the moon, about meadows nailed with firma- 
mented stars to the ultimate roof of things, where uni- 
corns filled the neighing air with galloping, or grazed 
or lay supine in golden-hoofed repose. 

Horace was seven when she was born. In the back- 
ground of her sober babyhood were three beings — a 
lad with a wild, thin face and an unflagging aptitude 
for tribulation ; a darkly gallant shape romantic with 
smuggled edibles, with strong, hard hands that smelled 
always of a certain thrilling carbolic soap— a being 
something like Omnipotence but without awesomeness; 
and lastly a gentle figure without legs or any inference 
of locomotion whatever, like a minor shrine, surrounded 
always by an aura of gentle melancholy and an endless 
and delicate manipulation of colored silken thread, 
ihis last figure was constant with gentle and melan- 
choly unassertion ; the second revolved in an orbit which 
bore It at regular inteiwals into outer space, then re- 
turned It with Its strong and jolly virility into her 
intense world again. But the first she had^ made her 
o^ by a sober and maternal perseverance, and so by 

threatening to tell Narcissa on him. ^ 

seven, had been removed from their lives as a small 
sachet of lavender might be removed from a chest of 

thro"u’ah“Z® t impalpability, and 

through the intense maturity of seven and eight and 

mne she cajoled and commanded the other two Then 

W u later aToxforT 

from which he returned just in time to see WiU Ln- 

179 



bow join his wife among pointed cedars and carven 
doves and other serene marble shapes; later Horace 
was separated from her again by a stupid mischancing 
of human affairs. 

But now he lay in the adjoining room, voyaging in 
safe and glittering regions beyond the moon, and she 
lay in her dark bed, quiet, peaceful, a little too peaceful 
to sleep. 

2 

He was settled soon and easily into the routine of 
days between his office and his home. The musty, solemn 
familiarity of calf-bound and never-violated volumes, 
on whose dusty bindings prints of Will Benbow’s dead 
fingers might probably yet be found; a little tennis in 
the afternoons, usually on Harry Mitchell’s fine court; 
cards in the evenings, also with Belle and Harry as a 
general thing, or again and better still, with the ever- 
accessible and never-failing magic of printed pages, 
while his sister sat across the table from him or played 
softly to herself in the darkened room across the hall. 
Occasionally men called on her; Horace received them 
with unfailing courtesy and a little exasperation, and 
departed soon to tramp about the streets or to read in 
bed. Dr. Alford came stiffly once or twice a week, and 
Horace, being somewhat of an amateur casuist, amused 
himself by blunting delicately feathered metaphysical 
darts upon the doctor’s bland scientific hide for an hour 
or so; it would not be until then that they realized that 
Narcissa had not spoken a word for sixty or seventy 
or eighty minutes. “That’s why they come to see you, 
Horace told her — “for an emotional mud-bath. 

Aunt Sally had returned home, with her bag of col- 
ored scraps and her false teeth, leaving behind her a 

180 


fixed impalpability of a nebulous but definite obliga- 
tion discliarged at some personal sacrifice, and a faint 
odor of old female fiesh which faded slowly from the 
presses, lingering yet in unexpected places so that 
at times Narcissa, waking and lying for a while in the 
darkness, in the sensuous pleasure of having Horace 
home again, imagined that she could hear yet, in the 
dark myriad silence of the house. Aunt Sally’s genteel 
and placid snores. 

At times it would be so distinct that she would pause 
suddenly and speak Aunt Sally’s name into an empty 
room. And sometimes Aunt Sally replied, having availed 
herself again of her prerogative of coming in at any 
hour the notion took her, unannounced, to see how they 
were^tting along and to complain querulously of her 
o^ household. She was old, too old to react easily to 
change, and it was hard for her to readjust herseif to 
her sisters’ ways again after her long sojourn in a 
household where every one gave in to her regarding all 
domestic affairs. At home her elder sister ran things 
in a capable, shrewish fashion; she and the third 

T if treating Aunt Sally like the child 

she had ^n sixty-five years ago, whose diet and cloth- 
ing and hours must be rigorously and pettishly super- 


“I can’t even go to the bathroom in peace,” she 

InTmoZ^h “I’"* “ g°°d niind to pack up 

and move back over here and let ’em get along tlie best 

umv^en fretfully in the chair which by 

I Wish you would take her back,” Miss Sopliia, the 

181 



elder sister, told Narcissa. “She’s got so crochety since 
she’s been with you that there’s no living with her. 
What’s this I hear Horace has taken up— making 
glassware?” 

His proper crucibles and retorts had arrived intact. 
At first he had insisted on using the cellar, clearing out 
the lawn mower and the garden tools and all the accu- 
mulate impedimenta, and walling up the windows so 
as to make a dungeon of it. But Narcissa had finally 
persuaded him upon the upper floor of the garage and 
here he had set up his furnace and had set fire to the 
building once and had had four mishaps and produced 
one almost perfect vase of clear amber, larger, more 
riclily and chastely serene, which he kept always on 
his night table and called by his sister’s name in the 
intervals of apostrophizing both of them impartially 
in his moments of rhapsody over the realization of the 
meaning of peace and the unblemished attainment of 
it, as “Thou still unravished bride of quietness.” 

Bareheaded, in flannels and a blue jacket with his 
Oxford club insignia embroidered on the pocket and 
his racket under his arm, Horace passed on around the 
house, and the court came into view with its two occu- 
pants in fluid' violent action. Beneath an arcade of 
white pilasters and vine-hung beams, Belle, surrounded 
by the fragile, harmonious impedimenta of the mo- 
ment, was like a butterfly. Two sat with her, in bright 
relief against the dark foliage of a crape myrtle not 
yet in flower. The otlier woman (the third member of 
the group was a young girl in white, with a grave 
molasses bang, and a tennis racket across her knees) 
spoke to him, and BeUe greeted him with a sort of 
languid possessive desolation. Her hand was warm, 

182 



prehensile, like mercury in his palm exploring softly, 
with delicate bones and petulant scented flesh. Her 
eyes were like hothouse grapes and her mouth was redly 
mobile, rich with discontent. 

She had lost Meloney, she told him. 

“Meloney saw through your gentility,” Horace said. 

“You grew careless, probably. Your elegance is much 

inferior to Meloney’s. You surely didn’t expect to 

always deceive any one who can lend as much rigid 

discomfort to the function of eating and drinking as 

Meloney could, did you.^ Or has she got married some 
more.?” 


J gone in business,” Belle answered fretfully. 

‘A beauty shop. And why, I can’t for the life of me 

Can you imagine 

Jefferson women supporting a beauty shop, with the 
exception of us three Mrs. Marders knd I might - I’m 
sure we need it, but what use has Frankie for one?” 

«■ u said, 

IS where the money came from. People thought that 

perhaps you had given it to her, Belle.” 

^ ^ public benefactor?” Belle 

said coldly. Horace grinned faintly. Mrs. Marders 

don’S’S:t7 kind-hearted you are; 

sai^qulU : benefactor,” Belle repeated. Horace 

an^av’ handmaiden for an ox, 

ny day. At least, he can save a lot of wear and tear 

on his cellar, not having to counteract your tea in I 

lot of casual mascuUne tummies. I suppose there’ll be 

‘Don’t't”"^ ’'^.■'15 T/" E. 

Hon t be silly,” Belle said. 


183 


Horace said : “I realize now* that it is not tennis that 
I come here for, but for the incalculable amount of 
uncomfortable superiority I always feel when Meloney 
serves me tea. ... I saw your daughter as I came 
along.” 

“She’s around somewhere, I suppose,” Belle agreed 
indifferently. “You haven’t had your hair cut yet,” she 
stated. “Why is it that men have no sense abo”t bar- 
bers.^” she said generally. The older woman watched 
liclle and Horace brightly, coldly, across her two 
flaccid chins. The young girl sat quietly in her simple, 
virginal wliite, her racket on her lap and one brown 
hand lying upon it like a sleeping tan puppy. She was 
watching Horace witli sober interest but without rude- 
ness, as children do. “They either won’t go to the barber 
at all, or they insist on having their heads all gummed 
up with pomade and things,” Belle added. 

“Horace is a poet,” the other woman said. Her flesh 
draped loosely from her cheekbones like rich, slightly 
soiled velvet; her eyes were like the eyes of an old tur- 
key, predatory, unwinking; a little obscene. ‘Poets 
must be excused for what they do. You should remem- 
ber that. Belle.” 

Horace bowed toward her. “Your race never faite 
in tact. Belle,” he said. “Mrs. Marders is one of the 
few people I know who give the law profession its true 

evaluation.” . , 

“It’s like any other business, I suppose, Belle^said. 

“You’re late today. Why didn’t Narcissa come?’ 

“I mean, dubbing me a poet,” Horace explained. 
“The law, like poetry, is tlie final resort of the lame, 
the halt, the imbecile, and the blind. I dare say Caesar 
invented the law business to protect himself against 

poets.” 


184 



“You’re so clever,” Belle said. 

The young girl spoke suddenly: “Why do you 
bother about what men put on their hair. Miss Belle? 
Mr. Mitchell’s bald.” 

The other woman laughed, unctuously, steadily, 
watching them with her lidless unlaughing eyes. She 
watched Belle and Horace and still laughed steadily, 

brightly and cold. “ ‘Out of the mouths of babes 

she said. The young girl glanced from one to anotlicr 
with her clear, sober eyes. She rose. 

“I guess I’ll see if I can get a set now,” she said. 

Horace moved also. “Let’s you and I ” he began 

Without turning her head Belle touched him with her 
hand. 


Sit down, Frankie,” she commanded. “They haven’t 

finished the game yet. You shouldn’t laugh so much 

on an empty stomach,” she told Mrs. Marders. “Do 
Sit down, Horace/’ 


The girl stood yet with slim and awkward grace, 
holding her racket. Slie looked at Belle a moment, then 
she turned her face to the court again. Horace took 
the chair beyond Belle. Her hand dropped hidden into 
his, with that secret movement ; then it grew passive ; 
it was as though she had turned a current off some- 

^ dark room in search of 
somrthing, finding it and pressing the light off again. 

bod^Th Horace spoke across Belle’s 

body. The girl did not turn her head. 

dance,” she answered. “I guess they are 
d d TW good ones 

k ued I’ve T sot 

kdkd I ve seen his picture, but I don’t remember his 


“Oh, don’t start talking about the war, for heaven’s 

185 



sake,” Belle said. Her hand stirred in Horace’s. “I had 
to listen to Harry for two years. Explaining why he 
couldn’t go. As if I cared whether he did or not.” 

“He had a family to support,” Mrs. Marders sug- 
gested brightly. Belle half reclined, her head against 
the chair-back, her hidden hand moving slowly in 
Horace’s, exploring, turning ceaselessly, like a separate 
volition curious but without warmth. 

“Some of them were aviators,” the girl continued. 


She stood with one little unemphatic hip braced against 
the table, her racket clasped beneath her arm, turning 
the pages of a magazine. Then she closed the magazine 
and again she watched the two figures leanly antic upon 
the court. “I danced with one of those Sartoris boys 
once. I was too scared to know which one it was. I 


wasn’t anything but a baby, then.” 

“Were they poets Horace asked. “I mean, the one 
that got back I know the other one, the dead one, was.” 

“He sure can drive that car of his,” she answered, 
still watching the players, her straight hair (hers was 
the first bobbed head in town) not brown, not gold, her 
brief nose in profile, her brown, still hand clasping her 

racket. Belle stirred and freed her hand. 

“Do go and play, you all,” she said. “You make me 

nervous, both of you.” i • t i.> 

Horace rose with alacrity. “Come on, Frankie. Let s 


you and I take ’em on for a set. ^ 

They took the court, matched against the two 
Horace was an exceptional player, erratic and n - 
liant. One who knew tennis and who had a cool hea 
could have defeated him out of hand by letting him 
beat himself. But not these. His partner o'^erreacM 
herself frequently, but Horace managed to retne 


186 


the point with stroking or strategy so audacious as to 
obscure the faultiness of his tactics. 


Just as Horace made the final point Harry Mitchell 
appeared, in tight flannels and a white silk' shirt and 
new ornate sport shoes that cost twenty dollars. With 
a new racket in a patent case and press, he stood 
with his squat legs and his bald bullet head and his 
undershot jaw of rotting teeth beside the studied pic- 
ture of his wife. Presently, when he had been made to 
drink a cup of tea, he would gather up all the men 
present and lead them through the liouse to his bath- 
room and give them whisky, pouring a glass and bring- 
ing it down to Rachel in the kitchen on the way back. 
He would give you the shirt off of his back. He was a 
cotton speculator and a good one ; he was ugly as sin 
and fend-hearted and dogmatic and talkative, and he 
caM Belle “little mother” until she broke him of it. 

Horace and his partner left the court together and 
approached the group. 

Mrs. Marders sat now with her slack chins in a raised 
teacup. 


The girl turned to him with polite finality. “Thanks 
for playmg wth me,” she said. “I’ll be better some day, 
I hope. We beat ’em,” she said generally. 

You and the little lady gave ’em the works liev 

feh Hi^ discolored 

teeth. His heavy prognathous jaw narrowed delicately 

down, then nipped abruptly off into bewildered ^ 


’em gef my rUey » 

“Horace,” Belle said, “your tea is getting cold.” 

187 


It had been fetched out by the combination gardener- 
stableman-chauiTeur, temporarily impressed in a white 
jacket and smelling of vulcanized rubber and ammonia. 
Mrs. Marders removed her chins from her cup. 

“Horace plays too well,” she said, “really too well. 
The other men can’t compare with him. You were lucky 
to liave him for a partner, child.” 

“Yessum,” the girl agreed. ‘T guess he won’t risk me 


again.” 

“Nonsense,” Mrs. Marders rejoined. “Horace en- 
joyed playing wdth you, with a young, fresh girl. 

Didn’t you notice it. Belle 

Belle made no reply. She poured Horace’s tea, and 
at tliis moment her daughter came across the lawn in 
her crocus-yellow dress. Her eyes were like stars, more 
soft and melting than any deer’s, and she gave Horace 


a swift shining glance. 

“Well, Titania?” he said. , 

Belle half turned her head, with the teapot poised 

above the cup, and Harry set his cup on the 
went and knelt on one knee in her path, as though he 
were cajoling a puppy. The child came up, still watch- 
ing Horace witli radiant and melting diffidence, and 
jiermitted her father to embrace her and fondle her wi 

his short, heavy hands. ... j x i. 

“Daddy’s gal,” Harry said. She submitted to haying 

her prim little dress mussed, pleasurably but a Uttle 

restively. Her eyes flew shining ^Kain. 

“Don’t muss vour dress, sister,’ Belle said- The 

evaded her father’s hands with a 

“What is it now?” Belle asked. “Why aren t you play 


^‘Nothing. I just came home.” She came 
diffidently beside her mother’s chair. 

188 


and stood 



“Speak to the company,” Belle said. “Don’t you 
know better than to come where older people are with- 
out speaking to them?” The little girl did so, shyly 
and faultlessly, greeting them in rotation, and her 
mother turned and pulled and patted at her straight, 
soft hair. “Now, go on and play. Why do you always 
want to come around where grown people are? You’re 
not interested in what we’re doing.” 

“Ah, let her stay, mother,” Harry said. “She wants 
to watch her daddy and Horace play tennis.” 

“Run along, now,” Belle repeated, with a final pat. 
“And do keep your dress clean.” 

“Yessum,” the child agreed, and she turned obedi- 
ently, giving Horace another quick shining look. He 
watched her and saw Rachel open the kitchen door 
and speak to her as she passed, saw her turn and mount 
the steps into the kitchen. 

“What a beautifully mannered child,” Mrs. Marders 
said. 

“They’re so hard to do anything with,” Belle said. 
“She has some of her father’s traits. Drink your tea, 
Harry.” 

Harry took his cup from the table and sucked its 
lukewarm contents into himself noisily and dutifully. 
“Well, big boy, how about a set? These squirrels think 
they can beat us.” 

“Frankie wants to play again,” Belle interposed. 
“Let the child have the court for a little while, Harry.” 
Harry was busy uncasing his racket. He paused and 
raised his savage undershot face and his dull kind eyes. 

“No, no,” the girl protested quickly. “I’ve had 
enough. I’d rather look on a while.” 

Don t be silly,” Belle said. *‘They can play any 
time. Make them let her play, Harry.” 

189 


G 



“Sure the little lady can play,” Harry said. “Help 
yourself ; play as long as you want to.” He bent again 
and returned his racket to its intricate casing, twisting 
nuts here and there; his back was sullen, with a boy’s 
sullenness. 

“Please, Mr. Mitchell,” the girl said. 

“Go ahead,” Harry repeated, “Here, you jellybeans, 
how about fixing up a set with the little lady?” 

“Don’t mind him,” Belle told the girl. “He and 
Horace can play some other time. He’ll have to make 
a fourth, anyway.” 

The two players stood now, politely waiting. 

“Sure, Mr. Harry, come on. Me and Frankie’ll play 
you and Joe,” one of them said. 

“You folks go ahead and play a set,” Harry 
repeated. “I’ve got a little business to talk over with 
Horace. You all go ahead.” He overrode their polite 
protests, and they took the court. Then he jerked his 

head significantly at Horace. 

“Go on with him,” Belle said. “The baby!” Without 
looking at him, w-ithout touching him, she enveloped 
him with rich and smoldering promise. Mrs. Marders 
sat across the table from them, curious and bright and 
cold with her teacup. “Unless you want to play with 

that silly child again.” , 

“Silly?” Horace repeated. “She’s too young to be 

unconsciously silly yet.” . 

“Run along,” Belle told him, “and hurry back. Mrs. 

Afarders and I are tired of one another. 

Horace followed his host into the house, followed his 
short, rolling gait and the bald indomitability of his 
head. From the kitchen as they passed little Belles 

voice came steadily, recounting some ® 

the day, with an occasional mellow ejaculation fr 

190 



Hachael for antistrophe. In the bathroom Harry got 
a bottle from a cabinet, and preceded by labored, heavy 
footsteps mounting, Rachael entered without knocking, 
bearing a pitcher of ice water. 

“Why ’n’t y’all go’n and play, ef you wants?” she 
demanded. “Whut you let that ’oman treat you and 
that baby like she do, anyhow?” she demanded of 
Harry. “You ought to take and lay her out wid a stick 
of wood. :Messin’ up my kitchen at fo’ o’clock in de 
evenin’. And you ain’t helpin’ none, neither,” slie told 
Horace. “Gimme a dram, Mr. Harry, please, suh.” 

She held her glass out and Harry filled it, and she 
waddled heavily from the room. They lieard her de- 
scend the stairs slowly and heavily on her fallen arches. 
“Belle couldn’t get along without Rachel,” Harry 
said. He rinsed two glasses with ice water and set them 
on the lavatory. “She talks too much, like all niggers.” 
He poured into the two tumblers, set the bottle down. 
“To listen to her you’d think Belle was some kind of a 
wild animal. A damn tiger or something. But Belle and 
I understand each other. You’ve got to make allowances 
for women, anyhow. Different from men. Born con- 
trary; complain when you don’t please ’em and com- 
plain when you do.” He added a little water to his 
glass ; then he said, with astonishing irrelevance : “I’d 
kiU the man that tried to wreck my home like I would 
a damn snake. Well, let’s take one, big boy.” 

Presently he sloshed water into his empty glass and 
gulped that, too, and he reverted to his former 


«Ri.np own damn court,” he said. 
Belle gets all these damn people here every day. What 

I want IS a court where I can come home from work 

nd get in a couple of fast sets every afternoon. Appe- 

191 



tizer before supper. But every damn day I get home 
from work and find a bunch of young girls and jelly- 
beans, using it like it was a public court in a damn 
park.” Horace drank his more moderately. Harry lit a 
cigarette and threw the match on to the floor and swung 
his leg across the lavatory. “I reckon I’ll have to build 
another court for my own use and put a hog-wire fence 
around it with a Yale lock, so Belle can’t give picnics 
on it. There’s plenty of room down there by the lot 
fence. No trees, too. Put it out in the damn sun, and 
I reckon Belle’ll let me use it now and then. Well, sup- 


pose w’e get on back.” 

He led the way through his bedroom and stopped to 
show Horace a new repeating rifle he had just 
and to press upon him a package of cigarettes which he 
imported from South America, and they descended and 
emerged into afternoon become later. The sun was 
level now across the court where three players lea^d 
and sped with soft quick slappings of inbber soles, 
following the fleeting impact of the ball. Mrs. Marders 
sat yet with her ceaseless chins, although she was shak- 
ing of departure when they came up. Belle ^med he 
he!d against the chair-back, but Harry led Horace on. 
“W^re Roing to look over a location for 

court. I tliink I’ll take up tennis, f ® 

Marders with heavy irony. It was stdl when th y 

returned. Mrs. Marders was gone Belle 

with a magazine. A youth in a battered Ford had 

called for the girl Frankie, but another young man had 

dropped i... .nd -hm H»r«. ^d H..r, 

isr-iwr H.VP. 

19 « 



“Lemme get my racket, then,” he said finally, and 
Horace followed the heavy scuttling of his backside 
across the court. Belle looked briefly up. 

“Did you find a place?” 

“Yes,” Harry answered, uncasing his racket again ; 
“where I can play myself, sometimes. A place too far 
from the street for everybody that comes along to see 
it and stop.*’ But Belle was reading again. Harry un- 
screwed his racket press and removed it. 

“I’ll go in one set; then you and I can get in a fast 
one before dark,” he told Horace. 

“Yes,” Horace agreed. He sat down and watched 
Harry stride heavily on to the court and take his 
position, watched the first serve. Then Belle’s magazine 
rustled and slapped on to the table. 

“Come,” she said, rising. Horace rose, and Belie 
preceded liim and they crossed the lawn and entered 
the house. Rachel moved about in the kitchen, and 
they went on through the house, where all noises were 
remote and the furniture gleamed peacefully indistinct 
in the dying evening light. Belle slid her hand into his. 
clutching his hand against her silken thigh, and led 
him on through a dusky passage and into her music 
room. This room was quiet too and empty and she 
popped against him half turning, and they kissed. 
But she freed her mouth presently and moved again, 
and he drew the piano bench out and they sat on oppo- 
site sides of it and kissed again. “You haven’t told me 
you love me,” Belle said, touching his face with her 

nnger tips, and the fine devastation of his hair, “not in 
a long time.” 

Horace agreed, but be told 
^r, she Wning her breast against him and listening 
with a sort of rapt, voluptuous inattention, like a great 

19S 



still cat; and when he had done and sat touching her 
face and her hair with his delicate wild hands, she 
removed her breast and opened the piano and touched 
the keys. Saccharine melodies she played, from mem- 
or}’ and in the current mode, that you might hear on 
any vaudeville stage, and with a shallow skill, a feeling 
for their oversweet nuances. They sat thus for some 


time while the light faded, Belle in another temporary 
vacuum of discontent, building for herself a world in 
which she moved romantically, finely, and a little tragi- 
cally, w'ith Horace sitting beside her and watching both 
Belle in her self-imposed and tragic role, and lumself 
performing his part like the old actor whose hair is thin 
and whose profile is escaping him via his chin, but who 
can play to any cue at a moment’s notice wl^e the 
younger men chew their bitter thumbs in the wings. ^ 

Presently the rapid heavy concussions of s 

feet thumped again on the stairs mounting, and the 
harsh wordless uproar of his voice as he led some one 
else in the back way and up to his bathroom. Belle 
stopped her hands and leaned against him and kissed 
him again, clinging. “This is intolerable,” she said, 
freeing her mouth with a movement of her head. For 

a moment sl.e resisted against his arm, ^ “ 

crashed discordantly upon the keys and shd through 
Horace’s hair and down his cheeks tightening, 
freed her mouth again. “Now, sit over there. 

He obeyed ; she on the piano bench was m half 

shadow. Twilight was almost accomplished, 

line of her bent head and her back, tragic and stiU, 

making him feel young again We do turn coders upon 

ourselves, like suspicious old ladies spying 

Horace thought. No, like boys trying to head off a 

parade. “There’s always divorce, he said. 

194 


“To marry again?” Her hands trailed off into 
chords ; merged, faded again into a minor in one hand. 
Overhead Harry moved with his heavy staccato tread, 
shaking the house. “You’d make a rotten husband.” 

“I won’t as long as I’m not married,” Horace 
answered. 


She said, “Come here,” and he went to her, and in 
the dusk she was again tragic and young and familiar 
with a haunting sense of loss, and he knew the sad 
fecundity of the world and time’s hopeful unillusion 
that fools itself. “I want to have your child, Horace,” 
she said, and then her own child came up the hall and 
stood diffidently in the door. 

For a moment Belle w'as an animal awkward and 
mad with fear. She surged away from him in a mad, 
spurning movement; her hands crashed on the keys as 
she controlled her instinctive violent escape that left in 
the dusk a mindless protective antagonism, pervading, 
in steady cumulate waves, directed at Horace as well. 
Come in, Titania,” Horace said. 

The little girl stood diffidently in silhouette. Belle’s 

^ice was sharp with relief. “WeU, what do you want.P 

Sit ov^ there, she hissed at Horace. “What do vou 

want, Belle?” Horace drew aw'ay a little, but without 
rising* 

Bu?]ittle®R n soon,” he said. 

•nd hitoS ‘S 

Everybody’s gone home,” she answered. “I haven’t 
got anybody to play with.” 

said^she then ” BeUe 

said. She struck the keys again, harshly. “You worry 

195 



me to death, hanging around the house.” The little 
girl stood for a moment longer ; then she turned 
obediently and went away. “Sit over there,” Belle 
repeated. Horace resumed his chair and Belle played 
again, loudly and swiftly, with cold hysterical skill. 
0\'erhead Harry thumped again across the floor; they 
descended the stairs. Harry was still talking ; the voices 
passed on toward the rear, ceased. Belle continued to 
play ; still about him in the darkening room that blind 
protective antagonism, like a muscular contraction that 
remains after the impulse of fright has died. Without 
turning her head she said, “Are you going to stay to 


supper?” . 

He was not, he answered, waking suddenly. She did 

not rise with him, did not turn her head, and he let 
himself out the front door and into the late spnng 
twilight, where was already a faint star above the wind- 
less trees. On the drive just without the garage, Ha"y s 
new car stood. At the moment he was doing sometMng 

to the engine of it while the house-yard-stable-boy held 

a patent trouble-lamp above the beetling crag of Ins 
head, and his daughter and Rachel, holding tools or 

detached sections of the car’s viUls, 

tent dissimilar faces across his bent back and into ^ 

soft bluish glare of the light. Horace went on hoir^ 

ward. Twilight, evening, came swiftly. 

reached the corner where he turned the 

sputtered and failed, then glared above the mtersec 

tidns, beneath the arching trees. 



It was the evening of ,2^ 

climacteric of her musical year. During the whole cve- 


196 



ning Belle had not looked at him, had said no word to 
him, even when, in the departing crush at the door and 
while Harry was trying to persuade him upstairs for a 
night-cap, he felt her beside him for an instant, smelled 
the heavy scent she used. But she said no word to him 
even then, and he put Harry aside at last and the door 
closed on little Belle and on Harry’s glazed dome, and 
Horace turned into the darkness and found that Nar- 
cissa hadn’t waited. She was halfway to the street. 

“If you’re going my way, I’ll walk along with you,” 
he called to her. She made no reply, neither did she 
slacken her pace nor increase it when he joined her. 

“Why is it,” he began, “that grown people will go 
to so much trouble to make children do ridiculous 
things, do you suppose Belle had a houseful of 
people she doesn’t care anything about and most of 
whom don’t approve of her, and kept little Belle up 
three hours past her bedtime; and the result is, Harry’s 
about half tight, and Belle is in a bad humor, and 
little Belle is too excited to go to sleep, and you and 
I wish we were home and are sorry we didn’t stay 
there.” 

“Why • do you go there, then ?” Narcissa asked. 
Horace was suddenly stilled. They walked on through 
the darkness, toward the next street light. Against it 
branches hung like black coral in a yellow sea, 

“Oh,” Horace said. Then; “I saw that old cat Ulk- 
ing with you.” 

“Why do you call Mrs. Marders an old cat? Be- 
cause she told me something that concerns me and that 
everybody else seems to know already?” 

“So that’s who told you, is it? I wondered. . . .” 
He slid his arm within her unresponsive one. “Dear old 

197 



Narcy.” They passed through the dappled shadows be- 
neath the light, went on into darkness again. 

“Is it true?” she asked. 

“You forget that lying is a struggle for survival,” 
he said, “little puny man’s way of dragging circum- 
stance about to fit his preconception of himself as a 
figure in the world. Revenge on the sinister gods.” 

“Is it true?” she persisted. They walked on, arm in 
arm, she gravely insistent and waiting, he shaping and 
discarding phrases in his mind, finding tfme to be 
amused at his own fantastic impotence in the presence 


of her constancy. 

“People don’t usually lie about things that don t 
concern them,” he answered wearily. “They are im- 
pervious to the world, even if they aren’t to life. Not 
when the actuality is so much more diverting than their 
imaginings could be,” he added. She freed her arm 

with grave finality. 


“Narcy ” _ . 

“Don’t,” she said. “Don’t call me that.” The next 

corner, beneath the next light, was theirs ; they wouW 
turn there. Above the arched canyon of the street the 
sinister gods stared down with pale unwinking eyes. 
Horace thrust his hands into his jacket and for a space 
he was stilled again while his fingers learn^ the un- 
familiar object they had found in his pocket. Then he 
drew it forth : a sheet of heavy note-paper, folded tmee 
and impregnated with a fading heavy scent. A famihar 
scent, yet baffling for the moment, like a face watching 
him from an arras. He knew the face would 
a moment, but as he held the note in h.s A"®®” ^ 
sought the face through the corridors of 
distraction, his sister spoke suddenly and hard at his 


side. 


198 



“You’ve got the smell of her all over you. Oh, Horry, 
she’s dirty !” 

“I know,” he answered unhappily. “I know.” 

It was now well into June, and the scent of Miss 
Jenny’s transplanted jasmine drifted steadily into the 
house and filled it with constant cumulate waves like a 
fading resonance of viols. The earlier flowers were gone, 
and the birds had finished eating the strawberries and 
now sat about the fig bushes all day, waiting for them 
to ripen; zinnia and delphinium bloomed without any 
assistance from Isom, who, since Caspey had more or 
less returned to normalcy and laying-by time was yet a 
while away, might be found on the shady side of the 
privet hedge along the garden fence, trimming the 
leaves one by one from a single twig with a pair of 
mule shears until Miss Jenny returned to the house; 
whereupon he retreated himself and lay on the creek- 
bank for the rest of the afternoon, his hat over his eyes 
and a cane fishing-pole propped between his toes. 

Simon pottered querulously about the place. His 
Imen duster and top hat gathered chaff and dust on 
the nail m the harness room, and the horses waxed fat 
and lazy and insolent in the pasture. The duster and 
hat came down from the nail and the horses were har- 
nessed to the carriage but once a week now — on Sun- 
days, to drive in to to^m to church. Miss Jenny said 
she was too far along to jeopardize salvation by driving 
to churcli at fifty miles an hour; that she had ns manv 
sms as her ordinary behavior could take care of, par- 
icularly as she had old Bayard’s soul to get into 
heaven somehow also, what with him and young Bayard 
earing around the country every afternoon at the 
mminent risk of their necks. About young Bayard’s 

199 



soul Miss Jenny did not alarm herself at all: he had no 
soul. 

Meanwhile he rode about the farm and harried the 
negro tenants in liis cold fashion, and in two-dollar 
khaki breeches and a pair of field boots that had cost 
fourteen guineas he tinkered with farming machinery 
and with the tractor he had persuaded old Bayard to 
buy: for the time being he had become almost civilized 
again. He went to town only occasionally now, and 
often on horseback, and all in all his days had become 
so usefully innocuous that both his aunt and his grand- 
father were growing a little nervously anticipatory. 

“Mark my words,’* Miss Jenny told Narcissa on the 
day she drove out again, “he’s storing up devilment 
that’s going to burst loose all at once, some day. And 
then there’ll be hell to pay. Lord knows what it’ll be— 
maybe he and Isom will take his car and that tractor 
and hold a stcejde-chase with ’em. . . . What did you 

come out for? Got another letter?” 

^‘I’ve got several more,” Narcissa answered lightly. 
“I’m saving them until I get enough for a book; then 
I’ll bring them all out for you to read.” Miss 
sat opposite her, erect as a crack guardsman, with thax 
cold briskness of hers that caused agents and strange 
to stumble through their errands with premonitions of 
failure before they began. The guest sat mobonle^. 
her limp straw hat on her knees. “I just came to 
you,” she added, and for a moment her face held such 
graU and still despair that Miss Jenny sat more er^t 
yet and stared at her guest with her piercing gray 

^^“Why, what is it, child.? Did the man walk into 

^°«No,°no.””The look was gone, but stiU Miss Jenny 

200 



watched her with those keen old eyes that seemed to 
see so much more than you thought — or wished. “Shall 
I play a while? It’s been a long time, hasn’t it?” 

“Well,” Miss Jenny agreed, “if you want to.” 

There was dust on the piano. Narcissa opened it with 
a fine gesture. “If you’ll let me get a cloth——” 

“Here, lemme dust it,” Miss Jenny said, and she 
caught up her skirt by the hem and mopped the key- 
board violently. “There, that’ll do.” Then she drew her 
chair from behind the instrument and seated herself. 
She still watched the other’s profile with speculation 
and a little curiosity, but presently the old tunes stirred 
her memory again, and in a while her ej'es softened, 
and the other and the trouble that had shown momen- 
tarily in her face were lost in Miss Jenny’s own van- 
quished and abiding dead days, and it was some time 
before she realized that Narcissa was weeping quietly 
while she played. 

Miss Jenny leaned forward and touched her arm. 
“Now, you tell me what it is,” she commanded. And 
Narcissa told her in her grave contralto, still weeping 
quietly. 

“Humph,” Miss Jenny said. “That’s to be expected 
of a man that hasn’t any more to do than Horace has. 
I don’t see why you are so upset over it.” 

“But that woman,” Narcissa wailed suddenly, like a 

little girl, burying her face in her hands. “She’s so 
dirty !” 

Miss Jenny dug a man’s handkerchief from the 
pocket of her skirt and gave it to the other. “What do 
you mean?” she asked. “Don’t she wash often enough?” 

“Not that way. I m-mean she’s — she’s Narcissa 

turaed suddenly and laid her head on the piano. 

“Oh,” Miss Jenny said. “All women are, if that’s 

201 



what you mean.” She sat stiffly indomitable, con- 
templating the other’s shrinking shoulders, “Hmph,” 
she said again, “Horace has spent so much time being 
educated that he never has learned anything. . . . 
Why didn’t you break it up in time? Didn’t you see 
it coming?” 

The other wept more quietly now. She sat up and 
dried her eyes on Miss Jenny’s handkerchief. “It 
started before he went away. Don’t you remember?” 

“That’s so. I do sort of remember a lot of women’s 
gabble. Who told you about it, anyway? Horace 

“Mrs. Marders did. And then Horace did. But I 

never thought that he’d I never thought- ” 

Again her head dropped to the piano, hidden in her 
arms. “I wouldn’t have treated Horace that way,” she 


wailed. 

“Sarah Marders, was it? I might have known. . . • 
I admire strong character, even if it is bad,” Miss 
Jenny stated. “Well, crying won’t help any.” She rose 
briskly. “We’ll think what to do about it. Only I’d let 
him go ahead: it’ll do him good if she’ll just 
around and make a doormat of him. . . . Too bad 
Harry hasn’t got the spunk to . . . But I reckon 
he’ll be glad ; I knoW I would. . . . There, there, she 
said, at the other’s movement of alarm, “I don’t reckon 
Harry’ll hurt him. Dry your face, now. You better go 
to the bathroom and fix up. Bayard’ll be coming m 
soon, and you don’t want him to see you’ve been crying, 
you know.” Narcissa glanced swiftly at the door and 
dabbed at her face with Miss Jenny’s handkercluef. 


Then he would seek her through the house, and cross 
the drive and descend the lawn in the sunny afternoon 

202 



to where she sat in the white dresses he loved beneath 
the oak, into which a mocking-bird came each afternoon 
to sing, bringing her the result of his latest venture in 
glass-blowing. He had five now, in different colors and 
all nearly perfect, and each of them had a name. And as 
he finished them and while they w’ere scarce cooled, 
he must bring them across the lawn to w'here she sat 
with a book or with a startled caller perhaps — in his 
stained disheveled clothes and his sooty hands in which 
the vase lay demure and fragile as a bubble, and with 
his face blackened too with smoke and a little mad, 
passionate and fine and austere. 

For a time the earth held him in a hiatus that might 
have been called con\.entment. He was up at sunrise, 
planting things in the ground and watching them grow 
and tending them; he cursed and harried niggers and 
mules into motion and kept them there, and put the 
grist mill into running sliape and taught Caspey to 
drive the tractor, and came in at mealtimes and at night 
smelling of machine oil and of stables and of the earth, 
and went to bed with grateful muscles and with the 
sober rhythms of the earth in his body and so to sleep. 
But he still waked at times in the peaceful darkness of 
his room and without previous warning, tense and 
sweating with old terror. Then, momentarily, the world 
was laid away and he was a trapped beast in the high 
blue, mad for life, trapped in the very cunning fabric 
that had betrayed him who had dared chance too much, 
and he thought again if, when the bullet found you, you 
could only crash upward, burst; anything but earth. 

SOS 



Not death, no : it was the crash you had to live through 
so many times before you struck that filled your throat 
with vomit. 

But his days were filled, at least, and he discovered 
pride again. Nowadays he drove the car into town to 
fetch his grandfather from habit alone, and though 
he still considered forty-five miles an hour merely cruis- 
ing speed, he no longer took cold and fiendish pleasure 
in turning curves on two wheels or detaching mules 
from wagons by striking the whifiletrees with his 
bumper in passing. Old Bayard still insisted on riding 
with him when he must ride, but with freer breath, and 
once he aired to Miss Jenny his growing belief that at 
last young Bayard had outworn his seeking for violent 
destruction. 

Miss Jenny, being a true optimist — that is, expect- 
ing the worst at all times and so being daily agreeably 
surprised — promptly disillusioned him. Meanwhile she 
made young Bayard drink plenty of milk and otherwise 
superintended his diet and hours in her martinetish 
way, and at times she entered his room at night and 
sat for a while beside the bed where he slept, ^ 

Nevertheless young Bayard improved in his 
Without being aware of the progress of it he had be- 
come submerged in a monotony of days, had bwn 
snared by a rhythm of activities rejieated and repeated 
until his muscles grew so familiar with them os to get 
his body through the days without assistance from him 
at all. He had been so neatly tricked by earth, that 
ancient Delilah, that he was not aware that his loc^ 
were shorn, was not aware that Miss Jenny and old 
Bayard were wondering how long it would be before 
they grew out again. “He needs a wife,” was Miss 
Jenny’s thought; “then maybe he’ll stay sheared. A 

£04 



young person to worry with him,” she said to herself; 
“Bayard’s too old, and I’ve got too much to do to worry 
with the long devil.” 

He saw Narcissa about the house now and then, 
sometimes at the table these days, and he still felt her 
shrinking and her distaste, and at times Miss Jenn}^ 
sat watching the two of them with a sort of specula- 
tion and an exasperation with their seeming oblivious- 
ness of one another. “He treats her like a dog would 
treat a cut-glass pitcher, and she looks at him like a 
cut-glass pitcher would look at a dog,” she told herself. 

Then sowing-time was over and it was summer, and 
he found himself with nothing to do. It was like coming 
dazed out of sleep, out of the warm, sunny valleys 
where people lived into a region where cold peaks of 
savage despair stood bleakly above the lost valleys, 
among black and savage stars. 

The road descended in a quiet red curve between 
pines through which the hot July winds swelled with a 
long sound like a far-away passing of trains, descended 
to a mass of lighter green of willows, w’here a creek ran 
beneath a stone bridge. At the top of the grade the 
scrubby, rabbitlike mules stopped, and the younger 
negro got down and lifted a gnawed white-oak sapling 
from the wagon and locked the off rear wheel by wedg- 
ing the pole between the warped, wire-bound spokes of 
it and across the axletree. Then he climbed back into 
the crazy wagon, where the other negro sat motionless 
^th the rope-spliced reins in his hand and his head 
tilted creekward. “Whut ’uz dat?” he said. 

^ ‘^mut wuz whut?” the other asked. His father sat 
m his attitude of arrested attention, and the young 
negro listened also. But there was no further sound 

S05 



save the long sough of the wind among the sober pines 
and the liquid whistling of a quail somewhere among 
tlie green fastnesses of them. “Whut you hear, pappy?’* 
he repeated. 

“Somethin’ busted down dar. Tree fell, maybe.” He 
jerked tlie reins. “Hwup, mules.” The mules flapped 
their jack-rabbit ears and lurched the wagon into 
motion and they descended among cool, dappled 
shadows, on the jarring scrape of the locked wheel 
that left beliind it a glazed bluish ribbon in the soft red 
dust. At the foot of the hill the road crossed the bridge 
and went on mounting again; beneath the bridge the 
creek rippled and flashed brownly among willows, and 
beside the bridge and bottom up in the water, a motor- 
car lay. Its front wheels were still spinning and the 
engine ran at idling speed, trailing a faint shimmer of 
exhaust. The older negro drove on to the bridge and 
stopped; and the two of them sat and stared statically 
down upon the car’s long belly. .The young negro spoke 
suddenly. 

“Dar he is! He in de water under hit. I kin see his 
foots stickin’ out.” 

“He liable ter drowm, dar,” the other said, with in- 
terest and disapproval, and they descended from the 
wagon. The young negro slid down the creek bank. 
The other wrapped the reins deliberately about one of 
the stakes that held the bed on the frame and thrust 
his peeled hickory goad beneath the seat, and went 
around and dragged tlie pole free of the locked wheel 
and put it in the wagon. Then he also slid gingerly 
down the bank to where his son squatted, peering at 
Bayard’s submerged legs. 

“Don’t you git too dost ter dat thing, boy, he com- 

206 



manded. “Hit mought blow up. Don’t you hear it still 
grindin’ in dar.^” 

“We got to git dat man out,” the young one replied. 
“He gwine drown.” 

“Don’t you tech ’im. White folks be sayin’ we done 
it. We gwine wait right here ’twell some white man 
comes erlong.” 

“He’ll drown ’fo’ dat,” the other said, “layin* in dat 
water.” He was barefoot, and he stepped into the water 
and stood again with brown flashing wings of water 
stemming about his lean black calves. 

“You, John Henry!” his father said. “You come 
’way fum dat thing.” 

“We got to git ’im outen dar,” the boy repeated, and 
the one in the water and the other on the bank, they 
wrangled amicably while the water rippled about Bay- 
ard’s boot toes. Then the young negro approached 
warily and caught Bayard’s leg and tugged at it. The 
body responded, shifted, stopped again, and grunting 
querulously, the older negro sat and removed his shoes 
and stepped into the water also. “He hung again,” 
John Henry said, squatting in the water with his arm 
beneath the car. “He hung under de guidin’-wheel. His 
haid ain’t quite under water, dougli. Lemme git de 
pole.” 

He mounted the bank and got the sapling from the 
wagon and returned and joined his father where the 
other stood in sober, curious disapproval above Bay- 
ard s legs, and with the pole they lifted the car enough 
to drag Bayard out. They lifted liim on to the bank 
and he sprawled there in the sun, with his calm, wet 
face and his matted hair, while water drained out of his 
boots, and they stood above him on alternate legs and 
wrung out their overalls. 


207 



“Hit’s Gunnel Sartoris’s boy, ain’t it?” the elder said 
at last, and he lowered himself stiffly to the sand, 
groaning and grunting, and donned his shoes. 

“Yessuh,” tlie other answered. “Is he daid, pappy?” 

“Co’se he is,” the elder answered pettishly. “Atter 
dat otto’bile jumped offen dat bridge wid ’im en den 
trompled ’im in de creek? Whut you reckon he is ef he 
ain’t daid? And whut you gwine say when de law axes 
you how come you de onliest one dat foun’ ’im daid? 
Tell me dat.” 

“Tell ’um you holp me.” 

“Hit ain’t none of my business. I never run dat thing 
offen dat bridge. Listen at it dar, mumblin’ and 
grindin* yit. You git on ’fo’ hit blows up.” 

“We better git ’im into town,” John Henry said. 
“Dey mought not nobody else be cornin’ ’long today.” 
He stooped and lifted Bayard’s shoulders and tugged 
him to a sitting position. “He’p me git ’im up de bank, 
pappy.” 

“Hit ain’t none o’ my business,” the other repeated. 
But he stooped and picked up Bayard’s legs and they 
lifted him, and he groaned without waking. 

“Dar, now,” John Henry exclaimed. “Hear dat? 
He ain’t daid.” But he might well have been, with his 
long, inert body and his head wrung excruciatingly 
against John Henry’s shoulder. They shifted their grip 
and turned toward the road. “Hah I” John Henry ex- 
claimed. “Le’s go !” ., 1 * j 

They struggled up the shaling bank with him ana 
on to the road, where the elder let his end of bur- 
den slip to the ground. “Whuf.” He expeUed lus 
breath sharply. “He heavy ez a flou bar 1-^ , ,. 

“Come on, pappy,” John Henry said, le s git “n 
in de waggin.” The other stooped again, and they 

S08 



raised Bayard with dust caked redly on his wet thighs 
and heav^ him by grunting stages into the wagon. 
“He look like a daid man,” John Henry added, “and 
he sho’ do ack like one. I’ll ride back here wid ’im and 
keep his haid fuin bumpin’.” 

“Git dat brakin’ pole you lef’ in de creek,” his father 
ordered, and John Henry descended and retrieved the 
sapling and got in the wagon again and lifted Bayard’s 
head on to his knees. His father unwrapped the reins 
and mounted to the sagging seat and picked up his 
peeled wand. 

“I don’t like dis kin’ o’ trafBckin’,” he repeated. 
“Hwup, mules.” The mules lurched the wagon into 
motion once more, and they went on. Behind them tlic 
car lay on its back in the creek, its engine still mut- 
tering at idling speed. 

Its owner lay in the springless wagon, lax and inert 
with the jolting of it. Thus for some miles, while John 
Henry held his battered straw hat between the white 
man’s face and the sun. Then the jolting penetrated 
into that region where Bayard lay, and he groaned 
again. 

“Drive slower, pappy,” John Henry said. “De 
joltin’s wakin’ ’im up.” 

“I can’t help dat,” the elder replied ; “I never run 
dat otto-bile offen de bridge. I got to git on into town 
en git on back home. Git on dar, mules.” 

John Henry made to ease him to the jolting, and 
Bayard groaned again and raised his hand to his 
chest. He moved and opened his eyes. But he closed 
them immediately against the sun, and he lay with his 
head on John Henry’s kneesr cursing. Then he moved 
again, trying to sit up. John Henry held him down, 
and he opened his eyes again, struggling. 

209 



“L#et go, God damn you !” he said. “I’m hurt.” 

“Yessuh, Captain, ef you’ll jes’ lay still ” 

Bayard heaved himself violently, clutching his side; 
his teeth glared between his drawn lips and he gripped 
John Henry’s shoulder with a clutch like steel hooks. 
“Stop !” he shouted, glaring wildly at the back of the 
older negro’s head. “Stop him ; make him stop ! He’s 
driving my damn ribs right through me.” He cursed 
again, trying to get on to his knees, gripping John 
Henry’s shoulder, clutching his side with the other 
hand. The older negro turned and looked back at him. 
“Hit him with something!” Bayard shouted. “Make 
him stop. I’m hurt, God damn it!” 

The wagon stopped. Bayard was now on all fours, 
his head hanging and swaying from side to side like a 
wounded beast’s. The two negroes watched him quietly, 
and still clutching his side, he moved and essayed to 
climb out of the wagon. John Henry jumped down 
and helped him, and he got slowly out and leaned 
against the wheel, with his sweating, bloodless face and 
his clenched grin. 

“Git back into de waggin. Captain,” John Henry 
said, “and le’s git to town to de doctor.” 

The color seemed to have drained from his eyes too. 
He leaned against the wagon, moistening his lips with 
his’tongue. He moved again and sat down at the road- 
side, fumbling at the buttons of his shirt. The two 

negroes watched him. 

“Got a knife, son?” he asked. ^ 

“Yessuh.” John Henry produced it, and by Bayard s 
direction he slit the shirt off. Then with the negro s 
help Bayard bound it tightly about his body. He got 

to his feet. 

“Got a cigarette?” 


210 


John Henry had not. “Pappy got some chewin’- 
terbacker,” he suggested. 

“Gimme a chew, then.” They gave him a chew and 
helped him back into the wagon and on to the seat. 
The other negro took up the lines. They jingled and 
rattled interminably on in the red dust, from shadow 
to sunlight, uphill and down. Bayard clutched his chest 
with his arms and chewed and cursed steadily. On and 
on, and at every jolt, with every breath, his broken 
ribs stabbed and probed into his flesh ; on and on from 
shadow to sunlight and into shadow again. 

A final hill, and the road emerged from the shade and 
crossed the flat, treeless valley and joined the highway. 
Here they stopped, the sun blazing downward on his 
naked shoulders and bare head, while he and the old 
negro wrangled as to whether they should take Bayard 
home or not. Bayard raged and swore, but the other 
was querulously adamant, whereupon Bayard took tlie 
reins from his hand and swung the mules up the valley 
and with the end of the reins leished the astonished 
creatures into mad motion. 

This last mile was the worst of all. On all sides of 
them cultivated fields spread away to the shimmering 
hills. Earth was saturated with heat and broken and 
turned and saturated again and drunken with it, exud- 
ing heat like an alcoholic’s breath. The trees along the 
road were sparse and but half grown, and the mules 
slowed to a maddening walk in their owm dust. He sur- 
rendered the reins again, and in a red doze he clung to 
the seat, conscious only of dreadful thirst, knowing that 
he was becoming light-headed. The negroes too realized 
that he was going out of his head, and the young one 
removed his frayed hat and Bayard put it on. 

The mules with their comical, overlarge ears assumed 

211 



fantastic shapes, merged into other shapes without 
significance; shifted and merged again. At times it 
seemed that they were traveling backward, that they 
would crawl terrifically past the same tree or telephone 
pole time after time; and it seemed to him that the 
three of them and the rattling wagon and the two beasts 
were caught in a senseless treadmill: a motion without 
progress, forever and to no escape. 

But at last and without his being aware of it, the 
wagon turned in between the iron gates. Shadow fell 
upon his naked shoulders and he opened his eyes, and 
his home swam and floated in a pale mirage. The jolt- 
ing stopped and the two negroes helped him down and 
the young one followed him to the steps, holding his 
arm. But he flung him off and mount^ and crossed 
the veranda. In the hallway, after the outer glare, he 
could see nothing for a moment, and he stood swaying 
and a little nauseated, blinking. Then Simon’s eye- 
balls rolled out of the obscurity. 

“Whut in de Lawd’s name,” Simon said, “is you 


been into now?” 

“Simon?” he said. He swayed, staggered a httle for 
balance, and blundered into something. “Simon. ^ 

Simon moved quickly and touched him. “I KeP 
tellin’ you dat car ’uz gwine kill you ; I kep tellm 
you !” Simon slid his arm around Bayard and led him 
on toward the stairs. But he would not turn here, and 
they went on down the hall and Simon helped him into 

the office and he stopped, leaning on a cha^. 

“Keys,” he said thickly, “Aunt Jenny. Get dnnk.^^ 
“Miss Jenny done gone to town wid Miss Benbow, 
Simon answered. “Dey ain’t nobi^y here, ^n t nobody 
here a-tall ’cep’ de niggers. I kep tellm you. h 
moaned again, pawing at Bayard. “Dey am t no blood, 

212 



dough. Come to de sofa and lay down, Mist’ Bayard.” 

Bayard moved again. Simon supported him and he 
lurched around the chair and slumped into it, clutch- 
ing his chest. “Dey ain’t no blood,” Simon babbled. 

“Keys,” Bayard repeated. “Get the keys.” 

“Yessuh, I’ll git ’um.” But he continued to flap his 
distracted hands about Bayard until Bayard swore at 
him and flung him violently off. Still moaning “Dey 
aint no blood,” Simon turned and scuttled from the 
room. Bayard sat forward, clutching his chest. He 
heard Simon mount the stairs and cross the floor over- 
head. Then he was back, and Bayard watched him 
open the desk and extract the silver-stoppered de- 
canter. He set it down and scuttled out again and re- 
turned with a glass, to find Bayard beside the desk, 
drinking from the decanter. Simon helped him back to 
the chair and poured him a drink into the glass. Then 
he fetched him a cigarette and hovered futilely and 
distractedly about him. “Lemme git de doctuh, Mist’ 
Bayard.” 

“No. Gimme another drink.” 

Simon obeyed. “Dat’s three already- Lemme go git 
Miss Jenny en de doctuh, Mist’ Bayard, please, suh.” 

^‘No. Leave me alone. Get out of here.” 

He drank that one. The nausea, the mirage shapes, 
were gone, and he felt better. At every breath his side 
stabbed him with hot needles, so he was careful to 
breathe shallowly. If he could only remember that . . . 
Yes, he felt much better; so he rose carefully and went 
to the desk and had another drink. Yes, that was the 
stuff for a wound, like Suratt had said. Like that time 
he got that tracer in his belly and nothing would stay 
on his stom^h except gin-and-milk. And this, this 
wasn’t anything: just a few caved slats. Patch up his 

S13 


fuselage with a little piano wire in ten minutes. Not 
like Johnny. They were all going right into his thighs. 
Damn butcher wouldn’t even raise his sights a little. 
He must remember to breathe shallowly. 

He crossed the room slowly. Simon flitted in the dim 
hall before him, and he mounted the stairs slowly, hold- 
ing to the rail, while Simon flapped his hands and 
watched him. He entered his room, the room that had 
been his and John’s, and he stood for a while against 
the wall until he could breathe shallowly again. Then 
he crossed to the closet and opened it, and kneeling 
carefully, with his hand against his side, he opened the 
chest which was there. 

There was not much in it : a garment, a small leather- 
bound book, a shotgun shell to which was attached by a 
bit of wire a withered bear’s paw. It was John’s first 
bear, and the shell with which he had killed it in the 
river bottom near MacCallum’s when he was twelve 
j'ears old. The book was a New Testament; on the fly- 
leaf in faded brown, “To my son, John, on his seventh 
birthday, March 16, 1900, from his Alother.” He had 
one exactly like it; that was the year Grandfather had 
arranged for the morning local freight to stop and pick 
them up and take them in to town to start to school. 
The garment was a canvas hunting-coat, stained and 
splotched with what had once been blood, and scuffed 
and torn by briers and smelling yet faintly of saltpeter. 

Still kneeling, he lifted the objects out one by one 
and laid them on the floor. He picked up the coat again, 
and its fading, stale acridity drifted in his nostrils with 
an intimation of life and of warmth. “Johnny, c 
whispered, “Johnny.” Suddenly he raised the garment 
toward his face but halted it as sharply, and ^ith the 
coat half raised he looked swiftly over his shoulder. But 

214 


immediately he recovered himself and turned his head 
and lifted the garment and laid his face against it, 
defiantly and deliberately, and knelt so for a time. 

Then he rose and gathered up the book and the 
trophy and the coat and crossed to his chest of drawers 
and took from it a photograph. It was a picture of 
John’s Princeton eating-club group, and he gathered 
this also under his arm and descended the stairs and 
passed on out the back door. As he emerged, Simon 
was just crossing the yard with the carriage, and as 
he passed the kitchen Clnora was crooning one of her 
mellow, endless songs. 

Behind the smoke-house squatted the black pot and 
the wooden tubs where Elnora did her washing in fair 
weather. She had been washing today; the clothesline 
swung with its damp, limp burden, and beneath the pot 
smoke yet curled from the soft ashes. He thrust the pot 
over with his foot and rolled it aside, and from the 
woodshed he fetched an armful of rich pine and laid it 
on the ashes. Soon a blaze, pale in the sunny air, and 
when the wood was burning strongly he laid the coat 
and the Testament and the trophy and the photograph 
on the flames and prodded and turned them until they 
were consumed. In the kitchen Elnora crooned mellowly 
as she labored. Her voice came rich and plaintful and 
sad 'along the sunny reaches of the air. He must re- 
member to breathe shallowly. 

Simon drove rapidly to town, but he had been fore- 
staUed. The two negroes had told a merchant about 
finding Bayard on the roadside, and the news had 
reached the bank, and old Bayard sent for Doctor 
Peab^y. But Dr. Peabody had gone fishing, so he 
took Dr. Alford instead, and the two of them in Dr. 

216 


Alford's car passed Simon just on the edge of town. 
He turned about and followed them, but when he 
arrived home they had young Bayard anesthetized and 
temporarily incapable of further harm; and when Miss 
Jenny and Narcissa drove unsuspectingly up the drive 
an hour later, he was bandaged and conscious again. 
They had not heard of it. Miss Jenny did not recognize 
Dr. Alford’s car standing in the drive, but she had one 
look at the strange motor. 

“That fool has killed himself at last,” she said, and 
she got out of Narcissa’s machine and sailed into the 
house and up the stairs. 

Bayard lay white and still and a little sheepish in 
his bed. Old Bayard and the doctor were just leaving, 
and Miss Jenny waited until they were out of the 
room. Then she raged and stormed at him and stroked 
his hair while Simon bobbed and mowed in the comer 
between bed and wall. “Dasso, Miss Jenny, dasso! I 
kep’ a-tellin’ ’im!” 

She left liim then and descended to the veranda 
where Dr. Alford stood in impeccable departure. Old 
Bayard sat in the car waiting for Wm, and on Miss 
Jenny^s appearance he became his stiff self again and 
completed his departing, and he and old Bayard drove 

away. , 

Miss Jenny also looked up and down the verand^ 

then into the hall. “Where ” she said; then she 

called, “Narcissa.” A reply. “Where are you? she 
added. The reply came again, and Miss Jenny 
entered the house and saw Narcissa’s white dress in the 
gloom where she sat on the piano bench. “He’s 
Miss Jenny said. “You can come up and 
other rose and turned her face to the light, ‘^y, 
what’s the matter?” Miss Jenny demanded. You looK 

dl6 



lots worse than he does. You’re white as a sheet.” 

“Nothing,” the other answered. “I ” She stared 

at Miss Jenny a moment, clencliing her hands at her 
sides. “I must go,” she said, and she emerged into the 
hall. “It’s late, and Horace . , 

“You can come up and speak to him, can’t you?” 
Miss Jenny asked, curiously. “There’s not any blood, 
if that’s what you are afraid of.” 

“It isn’t that,” Narcissa answered. “I’m not afraid.” 

Miss Jenny approached her, piercing and curious. 
“Why, all right,” she said kindly, “if you’d rather not. 
I just thought perhaps you’d like to see he’s all right, 
as long as you’re here. But don’t if you don’t feel like 
it.” 

“Yes. Yes. I feel like it. I want to.” She passed Miss 
Jenny and went on. At the foot of the stairs she paused 
until Miss Jenny came up behind her; then she went 
on, mounting swiftly and with her face averted. 

“What’s the matter with you?” Miss Jenny de- 
manded, trying to see the other’s face. “What’s hap- 
pened to you? Have you gone and fallen in love with 
him.?” 

In love ... him? Bayard ?” She paused, then hur- 
ried on, clutching the rail. She began to laugh thinly, 
and put her other hand to her mouth. Miss Jenny 
mounted beside her, piercing and curious and cold. 
Narcissa hurried on. At the sUirhead she stopped 
again, still with her face averted, and let Miss Jenny 
pass her, and just without the door she stopped and 
leaned agai^t it, throttUng her laughter and her 
trembhng. Then she entered the room, where Miss 
Jenny stood beside the bed, watching her. 

There was a sickish-sweet Hngering of ether in the 
room, and she approached the bed blindly and stood 

«17 



beside it with her hidden clenched hands. Bayard’s 
head was pallid and calm, like a chiseled mask brushed 
lightly over with his spent violence, and he was watch- 
ing her, and for a while she gazed at him; and Miss 
Jenny and the room and all, swam away. 

“You beast, you beast,” she cried thinly, “why must 
you always do these things where I’ve got to see you?” 

“I didn’t know you were there,” Bayard answered 
mildly, with weak astonishment. 

Every few days, by Miss Jenny’s request, she came 
out and sat beside his bed and read to him. He cared 
nothing at all about books; it is doubtful if he had ever 
read a book on his own initiative, but he would lie 
motionless in his cast while her grave contralto voice 
went on and on in the quiet room. Sometimes he tried 
to talk to her, but she ignored his attempts and read 
on; if he persisted, she went away and left him. So he 
soon learned to lie, usually with his eyes closed, voyag- 
ing alone in the bleak and barren regions of his despair, 
while her voice flowed on and on above the remoter 
sounds that came up to them — Miss Jenny scolding 
Isom or Simon downstairs or in the garden, the 
tering of birds in the tree just beyond the window, the 
ceaseless groaning of the water pump below the bara. 
At times she would cease and look at him and find that 
he was peacefully sleeping. 

5 

Old man Falls came through the lush green of early 
June, came into town through the yet honzonta sun- 
light of morning, and in his dusty, neat overalls he 
now sat opposite old Bayard in immaculate hnen and a 

218 



geranium like a merry wound. The room was cool and 
still, with the clear morning light and the casual dust 
of the negro janitor’s infrequent disturbing. Now that 
old Bayard was aging and what with the deaf tenor of 
his stiffening ways, he was showing more and more a 
preference for surrounding himself with tilings of a 
like nature; showing an incredible aptitude for choos- 
ing servants who sliaped their days to his in a sort of 
pottering and hopeless futility. The janitor, who 
dubbed old Bayard General, and whom old Bayard, 
and the other clients for whom he performed seemingly 
interminable duties of a slovenly and minor nature, 
addressed as Doctor Jones, was one of these. He was 
black and stooped with querulousness and age, and he 
took advantage of every one who would permit him, and 
old Bayard swore at him all the time he was around 
and allowed him to steal his tobacco and the bank’s 
winter supply of coal by the scuttleful and peddle it 
to other negroes. 

The window behind which old Bayard and his caller 
sat gave upon a vacant lot of rubbish and dusty weeds. 
It was bounded by weathered rears of sundry one- 
story board buildings in which small businesses — re- 
pair- and junk-shops and such — had their lowly and 
ofttimes anonymous being. The lot itself was used by 
day by country people as a depot for their teams. 
Already some of these were tetliered somnolent and 
ruminant there, and about the stale ammoniac drop- 
pings of their patient generations sparrows swirled 
m garrulous clouds, or pigeons slanted with sounds 
like rusty shutters and strode and preened in burnished 

and predatory pomposity, crooning among themselves 
with guttural unemphasis. 

Old man Falls sat on the opposite side of the trash- 

219 



filled fireplace, mopping his face with a clean blue 
bandana. 

“It’s my damned old legs,” he roared, faintly 
apologetic. “Used to be I’d walk twelve-fifteen mile to 
a picnic or a singin’ with less study than what that ere 
little old tliree mile into town gives me now.” He 
mopped the handkerchief about that face of his, 
browned and cheerful these many years with the simple 
and abounding earth. “Looks like they’re fixin’ to g^e 
out on me, and I ain’t but ninety-three, neither.” He 
held his parcel in his other hand, but he continued to 
mop his face, making no motion to open it. 

“Why didn’t you wait on the road until a wagon came 
along?” Old Bayard shouted. “Always some damn 

feller with a fieldful of weeds coming *0 to^^.” ^ 

“I reckon I mought,” the other agreed. But gittin 

here so quick would sp’ile my holiday. I ain’t like you 
town folks. I ain’t got so much time I km hurry it. 
He stowed the handkerchief away and rose and laid 
his parcel carefully on the mantel, and from his shirt 
pocket he produced a small object wrapped « clean, 
frayed rag. Beneath his tedious and unhurried fingers 

there emerged a tin snuff-box Pol'^hed 

the dull, soft sheen of silver by handling and age O 

Bayard sat and watched, watched 

removed the cap of the box and put this, too, care- 
^"‘^rJ^turn yo’ face up to the light,” old man Falls 
‘^'"‘‘Li^sh Peabody says that stuff will give me blood- 
^'’j^fofheTlontinued his slow 

innocent eyes raptly E 

never said that,” he corrected quietly. One of them 

220 



young doctors told you that, Bayard. Lean yo’ face 
to the light.” Old Bayard sat tautly back in his chair, 
his hands on tlie arms of it, watching the other with his 
piercing old eyes soberly, a little wistfully; eyes filled 
with unnamable things, like the eyes of old lions, and 
intent. 

Old man Kails poised a dark gob of his ointment on 
one finger and set the box carefully on his vacated 
chair, and put his hand on old Bayard’s face. But old 
Bayard still resisted, though passively, w'atching him 
with unutterable things in his eyes. Old man Falls drew 

his face firmly and gently into the light from the 
window. 


“Come on here. I ain’t young enough to waste time 
hurtin’ folks. Hold still, now, so I won’t spot yo’ face 
up. My hand ain’t steady enough to lift a rifle-ball 
offen a hot stove-led no mo’.” 

Bayard submitted then, and old man Falls patted the 
salve on to the spot with small deft touches. Then he 
took the bit of cloth and removed the surplus from Bay- 
ard’s face and wiped his fingers and dropped the rag 
on to the hearth and knelt stiffly and touched a match 
to it. “We alius do that,” he explained. “My granny 
got that ’ere from a Choctow woman nigh a hundred 
and thutty year ago. Ain’t none of us never told what 
hit air, nor left no after-trace.” He rose stiffly and 
dusted his knees. He recapiied the box with the same 
unhurried care and put it away, and picked up his 

mantel and resumed his chair. 

black tomorrer, and long’s hit’s black, 
hit s workin . Don t put no water on yo’ face befo* 

mawnm , and I’ll come in again in ten days and dose hit 

sWlv ^ moment, counting 

slowly on his gnarled fingers; his lips moved, but with 

H 221 



no sound — “the ninth day of July, hit’ll drap off. And 
don’t you let Miss Jenny nor none of them doctors 
worry you about hit.” 

He sat with his knees together. The parcel lay on 
his knees and he now opened it after the ancient labo- 
rious ritual, picking patiently at the pink knot until a 
younger person would have screamed at him. Old Bay- 
ard merely lit a cigar and propped liis feet against the 
fireplace, and in good time old man Falls solved the 
knot and removed the string and laid it across his chair- 
arm. It fell to the floor and he bent and fumbled it 
into his blunt fingers and laid it again across the chair- 
arm and watched it a moment lest it fall again; then 
he opened the parcel. First was his carton of tobacco, 
and he removed a plug and sniffed it, turned it in his 
hand and sniffed it again. But without biting into it 
he laid it and its fellows aside and delved yet further. 
He spread open the throat of the resulting paper bag, 
and his innocent boy’s eyes gloated soberly into it. 

“I’ll declare,” he said,'“sometimes I’m rigid ashamed 
for havin’ sech a consarned sweet tooth. Hit don t give 
me no rest a-tall.” Still carefully guarding the other 
objects on his knees, he tilted the sack and shook two 
or three of the striped, shrimp-like things into hjs 
palm, and returned all but one, which he put in is 
mouth. “I’m a-feard now I’ll be losin’ my teeth ^some 
day and I’ll have to start gummin’ ’em or catin soft 
ones. I never did relish soft candy.” His leathery cheek 
bulged slightly with slow regularity like a respiration. 
He peered into the sack again, and he sat weighing it 

in his hand. , 

“They was times back in sixty-three and -fo when a 

feller could ’a’ bought a section of land and a couple 
of niggers with this here bag of candy. Lots of times 

222 



I mind, with everything goin’ agin us like, and sugar 
and cawfee gone and food sca’ce, eatin’ stole cawn when 
they was any to steal, and ditch weeds ef they wa’irt; 
bivouackin’ at night in tlie rniri, more’n like . . 

His voice trailed away among ancient phantoms of 
the soul’s and body’s fortitudes, in those regions of 
glamorous and useless striving where such gliosts abide. 
He chuckled and mouthed his peppermint again. 

“I mind that day we was a-dodgin’ around Grant’s 
army, headin’ nawth. Grant was at Grenada then, and 
Gunnel had rousted us boys out and we taken boss 
and jined \ an Horn down that-a-way. That was when 
Gunnel had that ’ere silver stallion. Grant was still at 
Grenada, but Van Dorn lit out one day, headin’ nawth. 
W hy, us boys didn’t know. Gunnel mouglit have 
knowed, but he never told us. Not that we keered much, 
long’s we was headin’ lo’a’ds home. 

“So our boys was ridin’ along to ourselves, goin’ to 
jine up with the balance of ’em later. Leastways tfie 
rest of ’em thought we was goin’ to jine ’em. But 
Gunnel never had no idea of doin’ that; his cawn 
hadn’t been laid by yit, and he was goin’ home fer a 
spell. We wa’n’t runnin’ away,” he explained. “We 
knowed Van Dorn could handle ’em all right fer a 
week or two. He usually done it. He was a putty good 
man, old man Falls said, “a putty good man.” 

“They were all pretty good men in those days.” old 

Bayard agreed. “But you damn fellers quit fighting 
and went home too often.” ^ © 

n Falls rejoined defensively, “even ef 

Uie hull country’s overrun with bears, a feller can’t 
hunt bears all the time. He’s got to quit once in a 
while, ef hit s only to rest up the dawgs and bosses. 
But 1 reckon them dawgs and bosses could stay on the 

SS3 



trail long as any,” he added with sober pride. “ ’Course 
ever’body couldn’t keep up with that ’ere mist-colored 
stalbon. They wasn’t but one animal in the Confedrit 
army could tech him — that last hoss Zeb Fothergill 
fotch back outen one of Sherman’s cavalry pickets on 


his last trip into Tennessee. 

“Nobody never did know what Zeb done on them 
trips of his’n. Gunnel claimed hit was jest to steal 
bosses. But he never got back with lessen one. One 
time he come back with seven of the orneriest critters 
that ever walked, I reckon. He tried to swap ’em fer 
meat and cawn-meal, but wouldn’t nobody have ’em. 
Then he tried to give ’em to the army, but even the 
army wouldn’t have ’em. So he finally turned ’em loose 
and requisitioned to Joe Johnston haidquarters fer 
ten bosses sold to Forrest’s cavalry. I don’t know ef 
he ever got air answer. Nate Forrest wouldn’t ’a’ had 
them bosses. I doubt ef they’d even ’a’ et ’em in Vicks- 
burg. ... I never did put no big reliability in Zeb 
Fothergill, him cornin’ and goin’ by hisself like he done. 
But he knowed bosses, and he usually fotch a 'J" 

home ever’ time he went away the war. But be 

never got another’n like this befo . 

The bulge was gone from his cheek, and he pro- 
duced his pocket knife and cut a neat segment from his 
plug of tobacco and lipped it from the knif^blade. 
Then he rewrappcd his parcel and tied tlf ftr.ng about 
it. The ash of old Bayard’s cigar trembled dehcately 

about its glowing heart, but did not yet fall. 

Old man FalU spat neatly and brolly into the cold 
fireplace. “That day we was in Calhoun county, ^ h 

continued. “Hit was as putty a '"“7fLlin’ 

you ever see ; men and bosses rested and M “^tec^in 

Lart, trottin’ along the road through the woods and 

234 



fields whar birds was a-singin’ and young rabbits lopin’ 
acrost the road. Gunnel and Zeb was ridin’ along side 
by side on them two bosses, Gunnel on Jupiter and Zeb 
on that sorrel two-year-old, and they was a-braggin’ as 
usual. We all knowed Gunnel’s Jupiter, but Zeb kep’ 
a-contendin’ that he wouldn’t take no man’s dust. The 
rood was putty straight across the bottom to’a’ds the 
river and Zeb kep’ a-aggin’ the Gunnel fer a race, until 
Gunnel says ‘All right.’ He told the boys to come on 
and him and Zeb would wait fer us at the river bridge 
’bout fo’ mile ahead, and him and Zeb lined up and lit 
out. 

“Them hosses was the puttiest livin’ things I ever 
see. They went off together like two hawks, neck and 
neck. They was outen sight in no time, with dust 
swirlin’ behind; but we could fuller ’em for a ways by 
the dust they left, watchin’ it kind of suckin’ on down 
the road like one of these here ottomobiles was in the 
middle of it. When they come to whar the road drappcd 
down to the river, Gunnel had Zeb beat by about three 
hundred yards. Thar was a spring-branch jest under 
tlie ridge, and when Gunnel sailed over the rise, thar 
ww a comp’ny of Yankee cavalry with their hosses 
picketed and their muskets stacked, eatin’ dinner by 
the spring. Gunnel says they was a-settin’ thar gapin’ 
at the rise when he come over hit, holdin’ cups of cawfee 
and hunks of bread in their hands and their muskets 
sUcked about fo’ty foot away, buggin’ their eyes at 

T anyhow, but 

1 don t reckon he would have ef they’d been time. He 

jest spurred down the ridge and rid in amongst ’em, 
scattenn cook-fires and guns and men, shoutin’, ‘Sur- 
round em, boys! Ef you move, you air dead men,’ 

225 



One or two of ’em made to break away, but Gunnel 
drawed his pistols and let ’em off, and they come back 
and scrouged in amongst the others, and thar they 
set, still a-holdin’ their dinner, when Zeb come up. 
And that was the way we found ’em when we got thar 
ten minutes later.” Old man Falls spat again, neatly 
and brownly, and he chuckled. His eyes shone like 
periwinkles. “That cawfee was sho’ mighty fine,” he 
added. 

“And thar we was, with a passel of prisoners we 
didn’t have no use fer. We held ’em all that day and et 
their grub; and when night come we taken and throwed 
their muskets into the branch and taken their ammuni- 
tion and the rest of the grub and put a gyard on their 
bosses ; then the rest of us laid down. And all that night 
we laid thar in them fine Yankee blankets, listenin to 
tliem prisoners sneakin’ away one at a time, slippm 
down the bank into the branch and wading off. 
to time one would slip er make a splash er somethin , 
then they’d all git right still fer a spell. But putty soon 
w'e’d hear ’em at it again, crawlin’ through the bushes 
to’a’ds the water, and us layin’ thar with blanket-aidges 
held agin our faces. Hit was nigh dawn ’fore the last 
one had snuck off in a way that suited ’im. 

“Then Gunnel from whar he was a-layin’ let out a 

veil them pore critters could hear fer a mile. ^ 

“ ‘Go it, Yank,’ he says, ‘and look out fer moccasins . 

“Next mawnin’ we saddled up and loaded our plunder 
and ever’ man taken him a boss and lit out fer hoi^ 
We’d been home two weeks and Gunnel had his c 
laid by, when we heard ’bout Van Dorn ndm mto 
Holly Springs and burnin’ Grant’s sto 
never needed no help from us, noways. He ch 

226 



his tobacco for a time, quietly retrospective, reliving, 
in the company of men now dust with the dust for 
which they had, unwittingly perhaps, fought, those 
gallant, pinch-bellied days into which few who now 
trod that earth could enter w’ith him. 

Old Bayard shook the ash from his cigar. “Will,” 
he said, “what the devil were you folks fighting about, 
anyhow?” 

“Bayard,” old man Falls answered, “be damned ef I 
ever did know.” 

After old man Falls had departed with his small 
parcel and his innocently bulging cheek, old Bayard sat 
and smoked his cigar. Presently he raised his hand and 
touched the wen on his face, but lightly, remembering 
old man Falls’ parting stricture ; and recalling this, the 
thought that it might not yet be too late, that he might 
yet remove the paste with water, followed. 

He rose and crossed to the lavatory in the corner of 
the room. Above it was fixed a small cabinet with a 
mirror in the door, and in it he examined the black 
spot on his cheek, touching it again with his fingers, 
then examining his hand. Yes, it might still come off. 

* : * damned if he would; be damned to a man 

who didn’t know his own mind. He flung his cigar away 
and quitted the room and tramped through the lobby 
toward the door where his chair sat. But before he 
reached the door he turned about and came up to the 

cashier’s window, behind which the casliier sat in a 
green eyeshade. 

*‘Res,” he said. 

cashier looked up. “Yes, Colonel?” 

Who is that damn boy that hangs around here, 

227 



looking through that window all day?” Old Bayard 
lowered his voice within a pitch or so of an ordinary 
conversational tone. 

“What boy. Colonel?” 

Old Bayard pointed, and the cashier raised himself 
on his stool and peered over the partition and saw, 
beyond the indicated window, a boy of ten or twelve 
watching him with an innocent and casual air, “Oh. 
That’s Will Beard’s boy, from up at the boarding- 
house,” he shouted. “Friend of Byron’s, I think.” 

“What’s he doing around here? Every time I walk 
through here, there he is looking in that window. What 
does he want?” 

“Maybe he’s a bank robber,” the cashier suggested. 

“Wliat?” Old Bayard cupped his ear fiercely in his 
palm. 

“Maybe he’s a bank robber,” the other shouted, 
leaning forward on his stool. Old Bayard snorted and 
tramped violently on and slammed his chair back 
against the door. The cashier sat lumped and shapeless 
on his stool, rumbling deep within his gross body. He 
said without turning his head: “Colonel’s let Will Falls 
treat him with that salve.” Snopes at his desk made 
no reply; did not raise his head. After a time the boy 
moved, and drifted casually and innocently away. 

Virgil Beard now possessed a pistol that projected 
a stream of ammoniac water excruciatingly painful to 
the eyes, a small magic lantern, and an ex-candy show- 
case in which he kept birds’ eggs and an assortment of 
insects that had died slowly on pins, and a modest 

hoard of nickels and dimes. ^ 

In July Snopes had ^hanged his domicile. We 

avoided Virgil on the street and so for two weeks he 



liad not seen the boy at all, until one evening after sup- 
per lie emerged from the front door of his new abode 
and found Virgil sitting blandly and politely on the 
front steps. 

“Hi, Mr. Snopes,” Virgil said. 


Miss Jenny *s exasperation and rage when old Bay- 
ard arrived home that afternoon was unbounded. “You 
stubborn old fool,” she stormed, “can’t Bayard kill 
you fast enough that you’ve got to let that old quack 
of a Will Falls give you blood poisoning? After what 
Dr. Alford told you, when even Loosh Peabody, who 
thinks a course of quinine or calomel will cure anything 
from a broken neck to chilblains, agreed with him? I’ll 
declare, sometimes I just lose patience with you folks; 
wonder what crime I seem to be expiating by having 
to live with you. Soon as Bayard sort of quiets down 
and I can quit jumping every time the ’p lone rings, 
you have to go and let that old pauper daub your face 
up with axle grease and lampblack. I’m a good mind 
to pack up and get out, and start life over in some 
place where they never heard of a Sartoris.” She raged 
and stormed on; old Bayard raged in reply, with vio- 
lent words and profane, and their voices swelled and 
surged through the house until Elnora and Simon in 
the kitchen moved furtively, with cocked ears. Finally 
o d Bay^d tramped from the house and mounted his 
horse and rode away, leaving Miss Jenny to wear her 

rage out upon the empty air, and then there was peace 
lor a time. ^ 

But at supi^r the storm brewed and burst again. 
Behind the swing door of the butler’s pantry sfmon 

«• 229 



could hear them, and young Bayard too, trying to 
shout them down. “Let up, let up,” he howled, “for 
God’s sake. I can’t hear myself chew, even.” 

“And you’re another one.” Miss Jenny turned 
promptly upon him. “You’re just as trying as he is. 
You and your stiff-necked, sullen ways. Helling around 
the country in that car just because you think there 
may be somebody who cares a whoop whether or not 
you break your worthless neck, and then coming in to 
the supper-table smelling like a stable hand! Just be- 
cause you went to a war. Do you think you’re the only 
person in the world that ever went to a war? Do you 
reckon that when my Bayard came back from The 
War that he made a nuisance of himself to everybody 
that had to live with him? But he was a gentleman: he 
raised the devil like a gentleman, not like you Alissis- 
sippi country people. Clod-hoppers. Look what he did 
with just a horse,” she added. “He didn’t need any 
flying-machine.” 

“Look at the little two-bit war he went to,” young 
Bayard rejoined, ‘*a war that was so sorry that grand- 
father wouldn’t even stay up there in Virginia where 
it was.” 

“And nobody wanted him at it,” Miss Jenny r^ 
torted, “a man that would get mad just because his 
men deposed him and elected a better colonel in his 
place. Got mad and came back to the country to lead 

a bunch of red-neck brigands.” j « j 

“Little two-bit war,” young Bayard repeated, and 
on a horse. Anybody can go to a war on a horse. No 

chance for him to do much of anything.” 

“At least he got himself decently killed,” Miss Jen^y 
snapped. “He did more with a horse than you could do 

with that aeroplane.” 


230 



“Sho,” Simon breathed against the pantry door. 

“Ain’t dey gwine it? Takes white folks to sho’ ’nough 
quoil.” 

And so it surged and ebbed through the succeeding 
days; wore itself out, then surged again when old Bay- 
ard returned home with another application of salve. 
But by this time Simon was having troubles of his own, 
troubles on which he finally consulted old Bayard one 
afternoon. Young Bayard was laid up in bed with his 
crushed ribs, with Aliss Jenny mothering him with 
savage and cherishing affection and Miss Benbow to 
visit with him and read aloud to him, and Simon had 
come into his own again. The top hat and the duster 
came down from the nail, and old Bayard’s cigars de- 
pleted daily by one, and the fat matched horses spent 
tlieir accumulated laziness between home and the bank, 
before which Simon swung them to a halt each after- 
noon as of old, with his clamped cigar and smartly- 
fmlcd whip and all the theatrics of the fine moment. 

De ottomobile, Simon philosophized, “is all right fer 
pleasure en excitement, but fer de genu-wine gentlemun 
tone, dey am t but one thing: dat’s bosses.” 

Thus Simon’s opportunity came ready to his hand, 
and once they were clear of town and the team had set- 
tied into its gait, he took advantage of it 

“Well, Gunnel,” he began, “looks like’ me en you’s 
got to make some financial ’rangements.” 

“What.?” Old Bayard brought his attention back 
from where it wandered about the familiar planted 
fields and the blue, shining hills beyond. 

erbm./yvfn to arrange 

erbout a little cash monej’.” 

“Much obliged, Simon,” old Bayard answered, “but 

231 



I don’t need any money right now, Aluch obliged, 
though.” 

Simon laughed heartily. “I declare. Gunnel, you sho’ 
is comical. Rich man like you needin’ money!” Again 
he laughed, with unctuous and abortive heartiness. 
“Yes, suh, you sho’ is comical.” Then he ceased laugh- 
ing and became engrossed with the horses for a moment. 
Twins they were: Roosevelt and Taft, with sleek hides 
and broad, comfortable buttocks. “You, Ta^ lean on 
dat collar! Laziness gwine go in on you some day en 
kill j'ou, sho’,” Old Bayard sat watching his apelike 
head and the swaggering tilt of the top hat. Simon 
turned his W'izened, plausible face over his shoulder 
again. “But sho’ ’nough, now, we is got to quiet dem 
niggers somehow.” 

“What have they done? Can’t they find anybody to 
take their money?” 

“Well, suh, hit’s like dis,” Simon explained. “Hit’s 
kind of all ’round cu’i’s. You see, dey been collectin’ 
buildin’ money fer dat church whut burnt down, en 
ez dey got de money up, dey turnt hit over ter me, 
whut wid my ’ficial position on de church boa’d en bein’ 
I wuz a member of de bes’ fambly round here. Dat ’uz 
erbout las’ Chris’mus time, en now dey wants de money 

back.” 

“That’s strange,” old Bayard said. 

“Yessuh,” Simon agreed readily. “Hit struck me 

jes’ ’zackly dat way.” , . 

“Well, if they insist, I reckon you’d better give it 

back to ’em.” _ , . , 

“Now, you’s gittin’ to it.” Simon turned his he^ 

again; his manner was confidential, and he explode^ 

his bomb in a hushed, melodramatic tone: “De money s 

gone.” 

^32 



“Dammit, I know that,” old Bayard answered, his 
levity suddenly gone. “Where is it?” 

“I went and put it out,” Simon told him, and his 
tone was still confidential, with a little pained astonish- 
ment at the world’s obtuseness. “And now dem niggers 
’cusin’ me of stealin’ it.” 

“Do you mean to tell me you toot charge of money 
belonging to other people, and then went and loaned 
it to somebody else?” 

“You does de same thing ev’ry day,” Simon an- 
swered. “Ain’t lendin’ money yo’ main business?” 

Old Bayard snorted violently. “You get that money 
back and give it to those niggers, or you’ll be in jail, 
you hear.^” 


“You talks jos’ like dem uppity town niggers,” 
Simon told him in a pained tone. “Dat money done been 
put out, now,” he reminded his patron. 

“Get it back. Haven’t you got collateral for it?” 

“Is I got which?” 

“Something worth the money, to keep until the 
money is paid back.” 

\essuh, I got dat.” Simon chuckled again, unc- 
tuously, a satyrish chuckle rich with complacent 
innuendo. “Yessuh, I got dat, all rigl»t. Only I never 
heard hit called collateral befo’. Naw, suh, not dat.” 

“Did you give that money to some nigger wench?” 
old Bayard demanded. 

Well, suh, hit s like dis ” Simon began. But 

the other interrupted him. 

*Ah, the devil. And now you expect me to pay it 
back, do you? How much was it?” 


“I don’t rightly ricollick. Dem niggers claims hit 
wuz sevuinty er ninety dollars er somethin’. But don’t 


233 



you pay ’um no mind; you jes’ give ’um whutever you 
think is right: dey’ll take it.” 

“I’m damned if I will. They can take it out of your 
worthless hide, or send you to jail — whichever they 
want to, but I’m damned if I’ll pay one cent of it.” 

“Now, Gunnel,” Simon said, “you ain’t gwine let 
dem town niggers ’cuse a member of yo’ fambly of 
stealin’, is you?” 

“Drive on !” old Bayard shouted. Simon turned on 
the seat and clucked to the horses and drove on, his 
cigar tilted toward his hat-brim, his elbows out and the 
whip caught smartly back in his hand, glancing now 
and then with tolerant and easy scorn at the field nig- 
gers laboring among the cotton-rows. 


Old man Falls replaced the cap on his tin of salve, 
wiped the tin carefully with the bit of rag, then knelt 
on the cold hearth and held a match to the rag. ^ 
“I reckon them doctors air still a-tellin’ you hits 

gwine to kill you, ain’t they?” he asked. 

Old Bayard propped his feet against the hearth, 
cupping a match to his cigar, cupping two tiny match- 
flames in his eyes. He flung the match away and 

grunted. . . , 

Old man Falls watched the rag take fire sluggishly, 
with a pungent pencil of yellowish smoke that broke 
curling in the still air. “Ever’ now and then a feller has 
to walk up and spit in deestruction’s face, sort of, ter 
his oivn good. He has to kind of put a aidge on hisselt, 
like he’d hold his ax to the grindstone,” he said, squa 

ting before the pungent curling of the “ .‘'’““fis 

in a pagan ritual in miniature. “Ef a fel^r’l show h s 
face to deestruction ever’ now and then, deestruction 

234i 



leave *im be twell his time comes. Deestruction likes to 
take a feller in the back.” 

“WJiat?” old Bayard said. 

Old man Falls rose and dusted his knees carefully. 

“Deestruction’s like airy other coward,” he roared. 
“Hit won’t strike a feller that’s a-lookin’ hit in the eye 
lessen he pushes liit too dost. Your paw knowed tlmt. 
Stood in the do’ of that sto’ the day them two cyarpet- 
baggers brung them niggers in to vote ’em tliat day in 
72. Stood thar in his Prince Albert coat ami beaver 
hat, with his arms folded, when ever’body else liud left, 
and watched them two Missoun fellers herdin’ tfiem 
niggers up the road to’ds the sto’; stood right in the 
middle of tlie do’ while them two cyarpetbaggers begun 
backin’ off with tlieir hands in their pockets until tliey 
was d’ar of the niggers, and cussed l.im. And him 
sUndin’ thar jest like this.” He crossed his arms on 
his breast, his hands in sight, and for a moment old 
Bayyd saw, as through a cloudy glass, that arrogant 
and familiar shape which the old man in shabby over- 
alls had contrived in some way to immolate and pre- 
serve in the vacuum of his own abnegated self. 

“Then, when they was gone on back down the road. 
Gunnel reached around inside the do’ and taken out 
tne^ ballot-box and sot hit between his feet. 

.411* '^'Sgers come hyer to vote, did you?’ he says. 
All right, come up hyer and vote.’ 

^ “When they had broke and scattered he let off that 
ere dang der’nger over their heads a couple of times; 

«T- marched down the road to 

W^nterbottom’s, whar them two fellers boa’ded. 

Madam,’ he says, liftin’ his beaver, ‘I have a small 
matter of business to discuss with yo’ lodgers. Permit 

235 


me,’ he says, and he put his hat back on and marched 
up the stairs steady as a parade, with Miz Winterbot- 
tom gapin’ after him with her mouth open. He walked 
right into the room whar they was a-settin’ behind a 
table facin’ the do’, with their pistob layin’ on the 
table. 

“When us boys outside heard the three shots we run 
in. Thar wuz Miz Winterbottom standin’ thar, gapin’ 
up the stairs, and in a minute hyer come Gunnel with 
his hat cocked over his eye, marchin’ down steady as a 
co’t jury, breshin’ the front of his coat with his 
hank’cher. And us standin’ thar, a-watchin’ him. He 
stopped in front of Miz Winterbottom and lifted his 
hat agin. 

“ ‘Madam,’ he says, ‘I was fo’ced to muss up yo 
guest-room right considerable. Pray accept my apol(^ 
gies, and have yo’ nigger clean it up and send the bill 
to me. My apologies again, madam, fer havin’ been 
put to the necessity of exterminatin’ vermin on yo^ 
premises. Gentlemen,’ he says to us, ‘good mawnin. 
And he cocked that ’ere beaver on his head and walked 

out. - . j 

“And, Bayard,” old man Falls said, “I sort of 

them two Nawthuners, be damned ef I didn’t. A feller 
kin take a wife and live with her fer a long time, but 
after all they ain’t no kin. But the feller that ^brings 
you into the world or sends you outen hit . . . 


Where he lurked behind the pantry door Simon 
could hear the steady storming of Miss Jenny s an 
old Bayard’s voices ; later when they had . 

the office and Elnora and Caspey and Isom sat abou 

the table in the kitchen waiting for him, 
of Miss Jenny’s raging and old Bayards roc 

^36 


stubbornness came in muffled surges, as of far-away 
surf. 


“What dc quoilin’ erbout now?” Caspey asked. “Is 

you been and done somethin’?” he demanded of his 
nephew. 

Isom rolled his eyes quietly above his steady jaws. 
“Naw, sub,” he mumbled. “I ain’t done nuthin’.” 

“Seems like dey’d git wo’ out, after a while. What’s 
pappy doin’, Elnora.?” 

Up dar in de hall, listenin’. Go tell ’im to come on 
and git his supper, so I kin git done, Isom.” 

Isom slid from his chair, still chewing, and left the 
kitchen. The steady raging of the two voices increased; 
where the shapeless figure of his grandfather stood like 
a disreputable and ancient bird in the dark hallway, 
Isom could distinguish words : poison . . . blood 
think you can cut your head off and cure it . foci 
put it on your foot but . . . face head . . , dead and 
good riddance . , . fool of you dying because of your 

• • • you first lying on your back 


to eoing to worry me 

to death. Old Bayard s voice drowned the other tem- 

poranly Vt ,11 Falls won’t have a chance to kill me. 

I can t sit in my chair in town without that damn squirt 

s^hng around me and looking disappointed because 

1 m still alive on my feet. And when I get home, get 

away from him, you can’t even let me eat supper in 

of ^ T pictures 

of '^t some fool thinks a man’s insides look like.” 

Who gwine die, pappy Isom whispered. 

himon turned his head. “Whut you hangin’ eround 

km fcr, G,’. b„k ,o d.. Wf rt.’™ 


2S7 


“Supper waitin’,” Isom said. “Who dyin’, pappy?” 

“Ain’t nobody dyin’. Does anybody soun* dead? You 
git on outen de house, now.” 

Togetlier they returned down the hall and entered 
the kitchen. Behind them the voices raged and stormed, 
blurred a little by walls, but dominant and unequivocal. 

“Whut dey fightin’ erbout now?” Caspey, chewing* 
asked. 

“Dat’s white folks’ bizness,” Simon told him. “You 
tend to yo’n, and dey’ll git erlong all right.” He sat 
down and Elnora rose and filled a cup from the coffee- 
pot on the stove and brought it to him. “White folks 
got dey troubles same as niggers is. Gimme dat dish o 
meat, boy.” 

In the house the storm ran its nightly course, ceased 
as though by mutual consent, both parties still firmly 
entrcnclicd ; resumed at the supper table the next eve- 
ning. And so on, day after day, until in the second week 
in July and six days after young Bayard had been 
fetched home with his chest crushed, Aliss Jenny and 
old Bayard and Dr. Alford went to Memphis to con- 
sult a well-known authority on blood and glandular 
diseases with whom Dr. Alford, with some difficulty, 
had made a formal engagement. Young Bayard lay 
upstairs in his cast, but Narcissa Benbow had promised 
to come out and keep him company during 

Between the two of them tliey got old Bayard ™ 
early train, still protesting profanely, like a stubborn 
and' bewildered ox. There were others who knew them 
in the car and who remarked Dr. Alford’s ju^aposi- 
tion and became curious and solicitous. Old «ayara 
took these opportunities to assert himself again, witn 

violent rumblings which Miss Jenny ignored. 

They took him. like a sullen small boy, to the dime 

£38 


where tiie specialist was to meet them, and in a room 
resembling an easy and informal summer hotel lobby 
they sat among quiet, waiting people talking in whis- 
pers, and an untidy clutter of papers and magazines, 
waiting for the specialist to arrive. They waited a long 
time. 

Meanwhile from time to time Dr. Alford assaulted 
the impregnable affability of the woman at the switch- 
board, was repulsed, and returned and sat stiffly beside 
his patient, aware that with every minute he was losing 
ground in Miss Jenny’s opinion of him. Old Bavard 
was cowed too, by now, though occasionally lie rumbled 
hopefully at Miss Jenny. 

“Oh, stop swearing at me,” she interrupted him at 
last. You canH walk out now. Here, here’s the morninff 
paper — take it, and be quiet..” 

Then the specialist entered briskly and went to the 
switchboard woman, where Dr. Alford saw him and rose 
and went to him. The specialist turned — a brisk, dap- 
I^r man, who moved with arrogant, jerky motions, as 
though he were exercising with a smallsword, and who 
in turning almost stepped on Dr. Alford. He gave Dr. 
k j j &^assy» impatient stare; then he shook his 

desiccated burst of words. 

j I’ro^Ttness. Promptness. That’s 

good. Parent here? Stood the trip all right, did she?” 

“Yes, Doctor, he’s ” 

“Good; good. Undressed and all ready, eh?” 

^he patient is a m ” 

Smith ” * specialist turned. “Oh, Mrs. 

“Yes, Doctor.” The woman at the switchboard did 
not raise her head, and at that moment another special- 
ist of some kind, a large one, with a majestic, surrepti- 

2S9 



tious air like a royal undertaker, entered and stopped 
Dr. Alford’s, and for a while the two of them rumbled 
and rattled at one another while Dr. Alford stood 
ignored near by, fuming stiffly and politely, feeling 
himself sinking lower and lower in Miss Jenny’s opin- 
ion of his professional status. Then the two specialists 
had done, and Dr. Alford led his man toward the 
patient. 

“Got the patient all ready, you say? Good; good; 
save time. Lunching down town today. Had lunch 
yourself?” 

“No, Doctor. But the patient is a 

“Dare say not,” the specialist agreed. “Plenty of 
time, though.” He turned briskly toward a curtained 
exit, but Dr. Alford took his arm firmly but courte- 
ously and halted him. Old Bayard was reading the 
paper. Miss Jenny was watching them frigidly, her 
bonnet on the exact top of her head. 

“Mrs. Du Pre; Colonel Sartoris,” Dr. Alford said, 
“this is Dr. Brandt. Colonel Sartoris is your p ” 

“How d’ye do? How d’ye do? Come along with the 
patient, eh? Daughter? Granddaughter?” Old Bayard 
looked up. 

“What?” he said, cupping his ear, and found the 

specialist staring at his face. 

“What’s that on your face?” he demanded, jerking 
his hand forth and touching the blackened excrescence. 
When he did so the thing came off in his fingers, leav- 
ing on old Bayard’s withered but unblemished cheek 
a round spot of skin rosy and fair as any baby’s. 

On the train that evening old Bayard, who had sat 
for a long time in deep thought, spoke suddenly. 

“Jenny, what day of the month is this?” 


*‘The ninth,” Miss Jenny answered, “Why?” 

Old Bayard sat for a while longer. Then he rose. 
“Think 1*11 go up and smoke a cigar,” he said. “I 
reckon a little tobacco won’t hurt me, will it, Doctor.?” 

Three weeks later they got a bill from the specialist 
for fifty dollars. “Now I know why he’s so well known,” 
Miss Jenny said acidly. Then to her nephew: “You 

better thank your stars it wasn’t your hat he lifted 

off.” 

Toward Dr. Alford her manner is fiercely and bel- 
ligerently protective; to old man Falls she gives the 
briefest and coldest of nods and sails on with her nose 
in air; but to Loosh Peabody she does not speak at all. 


She passed from the fresh, hot morning into the cool 
hall, where Simon, uselessly and importantly propri- 
etorial with a duster, bobbed his head to her. “Dey done 
gone to Memphis today,” he told her. “But Mist’ Bay- 

y®"' Walk right up. Missy.” 

“rhank you,” she answered, and she went on and 
mounted the stairs and left him busily wafting dust 
from one surface to another and then back again. She 
mounted into a steady draft of air that blew through 
the open doors at the end of the hall. Through these 
doors she could see a segment of blue hills and salt- 
colored sky At Board’s door she stopped and stood 
there for a time, clasping the book to her breast. 

waJa^M^’ activity in the haU below, 

reached her from far away-nout-of-door sounds whose 

S41 


final drowsy reverberations drifted into the house on 
the vivid July air; sounds too somnolent and remote 
to die away. 

But from the room before her no sound came at all. 
Perhaps he was asleep, and the initial impulse — ^her 
passed word, and the fortitude of her desperate heart 
which had enabled her to come out despite Miss Jenny’s 
absence — having served its purpose and deserted her, 
she stood just without the door, hoping that he was 
asleep, that he would sleep all day. 

But she would have to enter the room in order to find, 
if he slept, so she touched her hands to her face, as 
though by that she would restore to it its wonted serene 

repose for him to see, and entered. 

“Simon Bayard said. He lay on his back, his hands 
beneath his head, gazing out the window across the 
room, and she paused again just within the door. At 
last, roused bv her silence, he turned his head and hw 
bleak gaze. “Well, I’m damned. I didn’t believe you d 

come out today.” 

“Yes,” she answered. “How do you feel.? 

“Not after the way you sit with one foot in the hall 
all the time Aunt Jenny’s out of the room,” he con- 
tinued. “Did she make you come anyway.? 

“She asked me to come out. She doesn’t want you to 

he alone all day, with just Simon m the house. Do you 

feel better today ?” tu<.n?”She 

“So?” lie drawled. “Won’t you sit down, then? bhe 

crossed to where her customary chair l.ad been moved 

into a corner and drew it across the 

watching her as she turned the cl.a.r about and seated 

herself. “What do you think about it? 

“About what?” „ 

“About coming out to keep me company. 

S42 



“I’ve brought a new book,” she said. “One H — one 
I just got. I hope you’ll like this one.” 

“I hope so,” he agreed, but without conviction. 
“Seems like I’d like one after a while, don’t it? But 
what do you think about coming out here today?” 

“I don’t think a sick person should be left alone with 
just negroes around,” she said, her face lowered over 
the book. “The name of this one is ” 

“Why not send a nurse out, then? No use your 
coming way out liere.” She met his gaze at last, with 
her grave, desperate eyes. “Why do you come when 
you don’t want to?” he persisted. 

‘ I don’t mind,” she answered. She opened the book. 
The name of this one ” 


Don’t,” he interrupted. “I’ll have to listen to that 
damn thing all day. Let’s talk a while.” But her head 
was bent and her hands were still on the open book. 
What makes you afraid to talk to me?” 

repeated. “Had you rather I’d go?” 

What? No, damn it. I want you to be human for 

one time and talk to me. Come over here.” She would 

not look at him, and she raised her hands between them 

as though he did not lie helpless on his back two yards 

away. Come over liere closer,” he commanded! She 
rose, clutching the book. 

“I’m going,” she said. “I’ll tell Simon to star where 
ne can hear you call. Good-bye.” 

‘‘Good-b3^e 

‘•After wlmt you just said, about leaving me alone 
with just niggers on the place?” She paused at t),e 
door, and be added with cold cunning: “After what 

Why are""^ f you .^what’ll I tel! her, tonight? 
Why are you afraid of a man flat on liis back, in a 


damn cast-iron strait-jacket, anyway?” But she only 
looked at him with her sober, hopeless eyes. “All right, 
damn it,” he said violently. “Go, then.” And he jerked 
his head on the pillow and stared again out the window 
while she returned to her chair. He said, mildly, 
“What’s the name of this one?” She told him. “Let her 
go, then. I reckon I’ll be asleep soon, anyway.” 

She opened the book and began to read, swiftly, as 
though she were crouching behind the screen of words 
her voice raised between them. She read steadily on for 
some time, while he on the bed made no movement, her 
head bent over the book, aware of time passing, as 
though she were in a contest with time. She finished a 
sentence and ceased, without raising her head, but 


almost immediately he spoke. 

“Go on; I’m still here. Better luck next time.” 

The forenoon passed on. Somewhere a clock rang the 
quarter hours, but saving this there was no other sound 
in tlie house. Simon’s activity below stairs had ceased 
long since, but a murmur of voices reached her at in- 
tervals from somewhere, murmurously indistinguish- 
able. The leaves on the brancli beyond the window did 
not stir, and upon the hot air myriad noises blended m 
a drowsy monotone — the negroes’ voices, sounds of 
animals in the barnyard, the rhythmic groaning of the 
water pump, a sudden cacophony of fowls in the garden 
beneath the window, interspersed with Isom’s meaning- 


less cries as he drove them out. 

Bayard was asleep now, and as she realized 
realized also that she did not know just when she had 
stopped reading. And she sat with the page open on 
lier knees, a page whose words left no echoes whatever 
in her mind, looking at his calm agam li^ 

a bronze mask, purged by illness of tlie heat of i 


244 


lence, yet with the violence still slumbering there and 
only refined a little. , . . She looked away and sat with 
the book open, her hands lying motionless on the page, 
gazing out the window. Tlie curtains hung without 
motion. On the branch athwart the window the leaves 
hung motionless beneath the intermittent fingers of the 
sun, and she sat also witliout life, tlie fabric of her dress 
unstirred by her imperceptible breathing, thinking that 
there would be peace for her only in a world where 
there were no men at all. 

The clock rang twelve times. Immediately after, 
preceded by stertorous breathing and surreptitious 
sounds as of a huge rat, and yet other furtive ratlike 
sounds in the hall, Simon thrust his head around the 
door, like the grandfather of all apes. 

he ’sleep yit?” he said in a rasping whisper. 

“Shhhhhh,” Narcissa said, lifting her hand. Simon 

entered on tiptoe, breathing heavily, scraping his feet 

on the floor. “Hush,” Narcissa said quickly, “you’U 
wake him.” 


“Dinner ready.” Simon said, still in that rasping 
whisper. ® 

wakes up, can’t 

you.? Narcissa whispered. “Simon!” she whispered. 

She rose, but he had already crossed to the table, wliere 

he fumbled clumsily at the stack of books and contrived 

at last to topple it to the floor in a random crash, 
iiayard opened his eyes. 

“are you here again?” 

“ef m.* exclaimed with ready dismay, 

Benbow ain’t waked him up.” 

bacl^th^T ‘j anybody lying on their 

ack with their eyes closed, I can’t see,” Bayard said. 

S45 


“Thank God you were not born in a drove, like mos- 
quitoes.” 

“Des lissen at ’im,” Simon said. “Go to sleep quoilin’ 
en w'ake up quoilin*. Elnora got dinner ready fer y’alL” 
“Wh}' didn’t you bring it up, then?” Bayard said. 
“Miss Bcnbow’s too. Unless you’d rather go down?” 
he added. 


In all his movements Simon was a caricature of him- 
self. He now assumed an attitude of shocked reproof. 
“Dinin’-room de place fer comp’ny,” he said. 

“No,” Narcissa said, “I’ll go down. I won’t put Simon 
to that trouble.” 

“ ’Tain’t no trouble,” Simon disclaimed. “Only hit 
ain’t no — ” 

“I’ll come down,” Narcissa said. “You go on and see 
to Mr. Bayard’s tray.” 

“Yes’m,” Simon said. He moved toward the door. 
“You kin walk right dowm. Elnora have hit on de table 
time you git dar.” He went out. 

“I tried to keep — ” Narcissa began. 

“I know,” Bayard interrupted, “he won’t let any- 
body sleep through mealtime. And you’d better go and 
have vours, or he’U carry everything back to the 
kitchen. And you don’t have to hurry back just on my 


account,” he added. , .1 j .. 

“Don’t have to hurry back?” She paused at the door 

and looked back at him. “What do you mean?’ 

“I thought vou might be tired of reading. 

“Oh,” she said, and looked away and stood for a 

moment clothed in her grave despair. ^ 

“Look here,” he said suddenly. “Are you sick or 

anything? Had you rather go home?” 

“No,” she answered. She moved again. I H be ba 




soon. 


S46 



She had her meal in lonely state in the somber 
dining-room while Simon, having dispatched Bayard’s 
tray by Isom, moved about the table and pressed dishes 
upon her with bland insistence or leaned against the 
sideboard and conducted a rambling monologue that 
seemed to have had no beginning and held no prospect 
of any end. It still flowed easily behind her as she w-ent 
up the hall; when she stood in the front door it was 
still going on, volitionless, as though entranced with its 
own existence and feeding on its own momentum. 

Beyond the porch the salvia bed lay in an unbearable 
glare of white light, in clamorous splashes. Beyond it 
the drive shimmered with heat until, arched over with 
locust and oak, it descended in a cool green tunnel to 
the gates and the sultry ribbon of the highroad. 
Beyond the road fields spread away shimmering, broken 
here and there by motionless clumps of wood, on to the 
hills dissolving bluely in the July haze. 

She leaned for a while against 'the door, in her white 
dress, her cheek against the cool, smooth plane of the 
jamb, in a faint draft that came steadily from some- 
where though no leaf stirred. Simon had finished in the 
mnin^rwm and a drowsy murmur of voices came up 
the hall from the kitchen, borne upon that thin stirring 
of air too warm to be called a breeze. 

At last she heard a movement from above stairs and 
she remembered Isom with Bayard’s tray, and she 
urned and shd the parlor doors ajar and entered. The 

foil lY® drawn closely, and the crack of light that 
followed her but deepened the gloom. She found the 

p ano and stwd beside it for a while, touching its dusty 

Till. it. She heard Isom descend the 

fairs, soon his footsteps died away down the hall, and 

247 


she drew out the bench and sat down and laid her arms 
along the closed lid. 

Simon entered the dining-room again, mumbling to 
himself and followed presently by Elnora, and they 
clashed dishes and talked with a mellow rise and fall 
of consonantless and indistinguishable words. Then 
they went away, but still she sat with her arms along 
the cool wood, in the dark, quiet room where even time 
stagnated a little. 

The clock rang again, and she moved. “I’ve been 
crying,” she thought. “I’ve been crying,” she said in 
a sad whisper that savored its own loneliness and its sor- 
row. At the tall mirror beside the parlor door she stood 
and peered at her dim reflection, touching her eyes with 
her finger tips. Then she went on, but paused again at 
the stairs, listening. Then she mounted briskly and en- 
tered Miss Jenny’s room and went on to her bathroom 
and bathed her face. 

Bayard lay as she had left him. He was smoking a 
cigarette now. Between puffs he dabbed it casually at 
a saucer on the bed beside liim, “Well?” he said, 
“You’re going to set the house on fire, that way, 
she told him, removing the saucer. “You know Miss 

Jenny wouldn’t let you do that,” ^ 

“I know it,” he agreed, a little sheepishly, and she 

dragged the table up and set the saucer upon it. 

“Can you reach it now,?” 

“Yes, thanks. Did they give you enough to eatr- 
“Oh, yes. Simon’s very insistent, you know. Shall 1 

read some more, or had you rather sl®®P; , 

“Read, if you don’t mind. I think I’ll stay awake. 

this time.” 

“Is that a threat?” ^ j u u 

He looked at her quickly as she seated herself a 

248 



picked up the book. “Say, what happened to you ?” he 
demanded. “You acted like you were all in, before 
dinner. Simon give you a drink, or what.^” 

“No, not that bad.’* And she laughed, a bttle wildly, 
and opened the book. “I forgot to mark the place,” 
she said, turning the leaves swiftly. “Do you remem- 

^1* No, you were asleep, weren’t you? Shall I go 

back to where you stopped listening?” 

“No. Just read anywhere. It’s all about alike, I 

guess. If you’ll move a little nearer, I believe I can stay 
awake.” 

“Sleep if you want to, I don’t mind.” 

“Meaning you won’t come any nearer?” he asked, 

watching her with his bleak gaze. She moved lier chair 

nearer and opened the book again and turned the pages 
on. 

I think it was about here,” she said, with indecision. 
Yes.” She read to herself for a line or two, then she 
began aloud, read to the end of the page, where her 
voice trailed off in grave consternation. She turned the 
next page, then flipped it back. “I read this once; I 
remember it now.” She turned the leaves on, her serene 
l^ow puckered a little. “I must have been asleep too,” 
she said, and she glanced at him with friendly bewilder- 
seem to have read pages and pages . . ,” 

“Oh, beg^n anywhere,” he repeated. 

No: wait; here it is.” She read again and picked 
up the thread of the story. Once or twice she raised 
her ey^ swiftly and found him watching her, bleakly 
u quietly. After a time he was no longer Watching 
her, and at last, finding that bis eyes were closed, she 

finished the chapter and stopped. 

No, he said drowsily, “not yet.” Then, when she 
laiJed to resume, he opened bis eyes and asked for 

S49 


a 


cigarette. She laid the book aside and struck the match 
for him, and picked up the book again. 

The afternoon wore away. The negroes had gone, 
and there was no sound about the house save her voice, 
and the clock at quarter-hour intervals; outside the 
shadows slanted more and more, peaceful harbingers 
of evening. He was asleep now, despite his contrary 
conviction, and after a while she stopped and laid the 
book away. The long shape of him lay stiffly in its cast 
beneath the sheet, and she sat and looked at his bold, 
still face and the broken travesty of him and her tran- 
quil sorrow overflowed in pity for him. He was so 
utterly witliout any affection for anything at all; so — 

so . . . hard . . . No, that’s not the word. But “cold” 
eluded her; she could comprehend hardness, but not 
coldness. . . . 

Afternoon drew on; evening was finding itself. She 
sat musing and still and quiet, gazing out of the win- 
dow where no wind yet stirred the leaves, as though she 
were waiting for some one to tell her what to do next, 
and she had lost all account of time other tlian as a 
dark unhurrying stream into which she gazed until the 
mesmerism of water conjured the water itself away. 

He made an indescribable sound, and she turned her 
head quickly and saw his body straining terrifically in 
its cast and his clenched hands and his teeth beneat 
his lifted lip, and as she sat blanched and incapable of 
further movement he made the sound again. His b**^**- 
hissed between his teeth and he screamed, a wordless 
sound that merged into a rush of profanity, and when 
she rose at last and stood over him with her hands 
against her mouth, his body relaxed and from beneath 
his sweating brow he watched her with wide infant eyes 
in which terror lurked, and mad, cold fury, and despair. 

250 



“He damn near got me, then,” ho said in a dry, light 
voice, still watching her from beyond the fading agony 
in his wide eyes. “There was a sort of loop of ’em 
around my chest, and every time he fired, he twisted 
the loop a little tighter. . . He fumbled at the sheet 
and tried to draw it up to his face. “Can you get me a 
handkerchief.? Some in that top drawer there.” 

“Yes,” she said, “yes,” and i:he went to tlie chest of 
drawers and held her shaking body upright bv clinging 
to it, and found a handkerchief and brought it to him. 
She tried to dry his brow and face, but at last he took 
the handkerchief from her and did it himself. “You 

scared me,” she moaned. “You scared me so bad. I 
thouglU . . 


“Sorry,” he answered shortly. “I don’t do that on 
purpose. I want a cigarette.” 

She gave it to him and struck the match, and again 
he had to grasp her hand to hold the flame steady, and 
still holding her wrist, he drew deeply several times. 
She tried to free her wrist, but his fingers were like 
steel, and her trembling body . betrayed her and she 

cl'air again, staring at him with terror 
and dread. He consumed the cigarette in deep swift 

still holding her wrist he began to talk 
of his dead brother, without preamble, brutally. It was 
a brutal Ule, without beginning, and crassly and use- 
lessly violent and at times profane and gross, tliough 
Its very wildness robbed it of offensiveness, just as its 
grossness kept it from obscenity. And beneath it all, 

* j u ®t*’uggling of his false and stubborn pride 
and she sitting with her arm taut in his grasp and her 

^her hand pressed against her mouth, watching him 
With terrified fascination. 

He was zigzagging: that was why I couldn’t get 


251 



on the Hun. Every time I got my sights on the Hun, 
John’d barge in between us again, and then I’d have 
to hoick away before one of tlie others got on me. Then 
he quit zigzagging. Soon as I saw him sideslip I knew 
it was all over. Then I saw the fire streaking out along 
his wing, and he was looking back. He wasn’t looking 
at the Hun at all; he was looking at me. The Hun 
stopped shooting then, and all of us sort of just sat 
there for a while. I couldn’t tell what John was up to 
until I saw him swing his feet out. Then he thumbed 
his nose at me like he was always doing and flipped his 
hand at the Hun and kicked his machine out of the way 
and jumped. He jumped feet first. You can’t fall far 
feet first, you know, and pretty soon he sprawled out 
flat. There w'as a bunch of cloud right under us and he 
smacked on it right on his belly, like w'hat we used to 
call gut-busters in swimming. But I never could pick 
him up below the cloud. I know I got down before he 
could have come out, because after I was down there 
his machine came diving out right at me, burning good. 
I pulled away from it, but the damn thing zoomed past 
and did a split-turn and came at me again, and I had 
to dodge. And so I never could pick him up when he 
came out of the cloud. I w'ent down fast, until I knew 
I was below him, and looked again. But I couldn’t find 
him and then I thought that maybe I hadn’t gone far 
enough, so I dived again. I saw the machine crash 
about three miles away, but I never could pick John up 
again. And then they started shooting at me from the 


ground ” , 

He talked on and her hand came away from ner 

mouth and slid down her other arm and tugged at his 

“Please,” she whispered. “Please!” He ceased then 

252 



and looked at her and his fingers shifted, and just as 
she thought she was free they clamped again, and now 
both of her wrists were prisoners. She struggled, staring 
at him dreadfully, but he grinned his teeth at her and 
pressed her crossed arms down upon the bed beside him. 

“Please, please,” she implored, struggling; she could 
feel the flesh of her wrists, feel the bones turn in it as in 
a loose garment, could see liis bleak eyes and the fixed 
derision of his teeth, and suddenly she swayed forwafd 
in her chair and her head dropped between her prisoned 
arms and she wept with hopeless and dreadful hysteria. 

After a while there was no sound in the room again, 
and he moved his head and looked at the dark crown of 
her head. He lifted his hand and saw the bruised dis- 
colorations where he had gripped her wrists. But she 
did not stir even then, and he dropped his hand upon 
her wrists again and lay quietly, and after a while even 
her shuddering and trembling had ceased. 

“I’m sorry,” he said. “I won’t do it again.” 

He could see only the top of her dark head, and her 
hands lay passive beneath his. 

“Pm sorry,” he repeated. “I won’t do it any more.” 

You won’t drive that car fast any more?” she asked, 
without moving; her voice was muffled. 

“What?” 

She made no answer, and with infinite small pains 
and slowly he turned himself, cast and all, by degrees 
on to his side, chewing his lip and swearing under his 
breath, and laid his other hand on her hair 

• she asked, still without rais- 

mg her head. ‘You’ll break your ribs again ” 

'^'Vl^wardly. 

lhats the trouble, right there,” she said. “That’s 

i 253 


the way you act : doing things that — ^that You do 

things to hurt yourself just to worry people. You don’t 
get any fun out of doing them.” 

“No,” he agreed, and he lay with his chest full of 
hot needles, stroking her dark head with his hard, 
awkward hand. Far above him now the peak among the 
black and savage stars, and about him the valleys of 
tranquillity and of peace. It was later still; already 
shadows were growing in the room and losing them- 
selves in shadow, and beyond the window sunlight was 
a diffused radiance, sourceless yet palpable. From 
somewhere cows lowed one to another, moody and 
mournful. At last she sat up, touching her face and 

her hair. 

“You’re all twisted. You’ll never get well if you don t 
behave yourself. Turn on your back, now.” He obeyed, 
slowly and painfully, his lip between his teeth and faint 
beads on bis forehead, while she watched him with grave 
anxiety. “Does it hurt.?” 

“No,” he answered, and his hand shut again on her 
wrists that made no effort to withdraw. The sun was 
gone, and twilight, foster dam of quietude and ^acc, 
filled the fading room, and evening had found iteelt. 

“And you won’t drive that car fast any more? she 

persisted from the dusk. 

“No,” he answered. 


8 

Meanwhile she had received another letter from her 
anonymous correspondent. Horace, when he came >n 
one night, had brought it in to her as she lay in bed 
with a book ; tapped at her door and opened it and 
stood for a moment diffidently, and for a while th y 

354 



looked at one another across the barrier of their 
estrangement and their stubborn pride. 

“Excuse me for disturbing you,*’ he said stiffly. She 

lay beneath the shaded light, with the dark splash of 

her hair on the pillow, and only her eyes moved as he 

crossed the room and stood above her where she lay 

with her lowered book, watching him with sober inter- 
rogation. 

“What are you reading.?” he asked. For reply she 

shut the book on her finger, with the jacket and its 

colored legend upward. But he did not look at it. His 

shirt was open beneath his silk dressing-gown and his 

thin hand moved among the objects on the table beside 

the bed; picked up another book. “I never knew you 
to read so much.” ^ 

reading, now.” she answered. 

Yes. His hand still moved about the table, touch- 
‘ mg things here and there. 


She lay waiting for him to speak. But he did not. 
and she said, “What is it, Horace?” 

He came and sat on the edge of the bed. But still 
her eyes were antagonistic and interrogatory and the 
shadow of her mouth was stubbornly cold. “Narev 
hy aid. She lowered her eyes to the book, and he added : 

ofte” at nirh" **“''*“« 


“Yes?” 


He laid his hand on her knee. “Look at me.” She 
raised her face, and the antagonism of her eyes. “I 

rep"eated^^°'°^*** leaving you alone at night,” he 

or tw“ to do it any more, 

or that you re not coming in at all?” ^ 

For a while he sat brooding on the wild repose of his 

S55 



hand lying on her covered knee. Then he rose and stood 
beside the table again, touching the objects there; then 
he returned and sat on the bed. She was reading again, 
and he tried to take the book from her hand. She 
resisted. 

“What do you want, Horace?” she asked impa- 
tiently. 

He mused again while she watched his face. He 
looked up. “Belle and I are going to be married,” he 
blurted. 

“Wliy tell me? Harry is the one to tell. Unless you 
and Belle are going to dispense with the formality of 
divorce.” 

“Yes,” he said. “He knows it.” He laid his hand on 
her knee again, stroking it through the cover. “You 

aren’t even surprised, are you?” 

“I’m surprised at you, but not at Belle. Belle has a 

backstairs nature.” 

“Yes,” he agreed; then: “Who said that to you? 
You didn’t think of that yourself.” She lay with her 
book half raised, watching him. He took her hand 
roughly ; she tried to free it, but vainly. “Who was it? 
he demanded. 

“Nobody told me. Don’t, Horace.” 

He released her hand. know who it was. It was 

Mrs. Du Pre.” ^ , 

“It wasn’t anybody,” she repeated. “Go away an 

leave me alone, Horace.” And behind the antagonism 

her eyes were hopeless and desperate. “Don t you see 

that talking doesn’t help any?” 

“Yes,” he said wearily, but he sat for a while > » 

stroking her knee. Then he rose and thrust his hands 

into his gown, but turning he paused again and drew 

256 



forth an envelope from his pocket. “Here’s a letter for 
you. I forgot it this afternoon. Sorry.” 

She was reading again. “Put it on the table,” she 
said, without raising her eyes. He laid the letter on the 
table and quitted the room. At the door he looked back, 
but her head was bent over her book. 

As he removed his clothes it did seem that that heavy 
fading odor of Belle’s body clung to them, and to his 
hands even after he was in bed; and clinging, shaped in 
the darkness beside him Belle’s rich voluptuousness 
until within that warm, not-yet-sleeping region where 
dwells the mother of dreams. Belle grew palpable in 
^tio as his own body slipped away from him. And 
Harry too, with his dogged inarticulateness and his 
hurt groping which was partly damaged vanity and 
shock, yet mostly a boy’s sincere bewilderment that 
freed itself terrifically in the form of movie subtitles. 
Just before he slept, his mind, with the mind’s uncanny 
attribute for irrelevant recapitulation, reproduced 
with the startling ghostliness of a dictaphone an inci- 
dent which at the time he had considered trivial. Belle 
had freed her mouth, and for a moment, her body still 
against his, she held his face in her two hands and 
sUred at him with intent, questioning eyes. “Have you 
plenty of money, Horace?” And “Yes,” he had an- 
swered immediately, “of course I have.” And then Belle 
again, enveloping him like a rich and fatal drug, like 

a motionless and cloying sea in which he watched him- 
self drown. 

The letter lay on the table that night, forgotten • it 

was not until the next morning that she disc^over^’ t 
and opened it. 

“I am trying to forget you I cannot forget you Your 

257 



big eyes your* black hair how white your black hair 
make you look. And how you walk I am watching you 
a smell you give oflf like a flowr. Your eyes shine with 
mistry and how you walk makes me sick like a fewer all 
night thinking how you walk. I could touch you you 
would not know it. Every day But I can not I must 
pore out on paper must talk You do not know who. 
Your lips like cupids bow when the day comes when I 
press it to mine. Like I dreamed in a fewer from 
heaven to Hell. I know what you do I know more than 
you think I see men vist you with bitter twangs. Be 
care full I am a desprate man Nothing any more to 
me now If you unholy love a man I will kill him. 

“You do not anser. I know you got it I saw one in 
your hand bag. You better anser soon I am desprate 
man eat up with fewer I can not sleep for. I will not 
hurt you but I am desprate. Do not forget I will not 
hurt you but I am a desprate man.” 

Meanwhile the days accumulated. Not sad days nor 
lonely : they were too feverish to be sorrowful, what 
with her nature torn in two directions and the walls 
of her serene garden cast down and she herself like a 
night animal or bird caught in a beam of light and 
trying vainly to escape. Horace had definitely gone 
his way, and like two strangers they followed the 

routine of their physical days, in an 
estrangement of long affection and similar pride 
neath a shallow veneer of trivialities. She sat mUi 
Bayard almost every day now, but at a discreet dis- 
tance of two yards. 

At first he had tried to override her with ^lus^r, 
then with cajolery. But she was firm, and at last he 
desisted and lay gazing quietly out the window or 

958 



sleeping while she read. From time to time Miss Jenny 
would come to the door and look in at them and go 
away. Her shrinking, her sense of anticipation and 
^ead while with him, w-as gone now, and at times 
instead of reading they talked, quietly and imperson- 
ally, with the ghost of that other afternoon between 
them, though neither ever referred to it. Miss Jenny 
had been a little curious about that day, but Narcissa 
was gravely and demurely noncommittal about it, nor 
had Bayard ever talked of it. And so there was another 
bond between them, but unirksome. Miss Jenny had 
heard gossip about Horace and Belle, but on this sub- 
ject also Narcissa had nothing to say. 

Have it your own way,” Miss Jenny said tartly; 

^ can draw my own conclusions. I imagine Belle and 

Horace can produce quite a mess together. And I’m 

glad of it. That man is making an old maid out of you. 

It isn’t too late now, but if he’d waited five years later 

to play the fool, there wouldn’t have been anything left 

for you except to give music lessons. But you can eet 
married, now.” ® 


Would you advise me to marry?” Narcissa asked. 
1 wouldn t advise anybody to marry. You won’t be 
happy, but then, women haven’t got civiUzed enough 
yet to be happy unmarried, so you might as well try 

* anyhow. And change is 

good for folks. They say it is, at least” 

But Narcissa didn’t believe that. “I shaU never 

was where 

unhappiness lay, getting men into your life. “And if 
I couldn t keep Horace, loving him as I did ” 

herLTf "P. the book and read on to 

herself, about antic people in an antic world where 

things happened as they should happen. The shadows 


259 



lengthened eastward. She read on, lost from mutable 
things. 

After a while Bayard waked, and she fetched him a 
cigarette and a match. “You won’t have to do this any 
more,” he said. “I reckon you’re sorry.” 

His cast would come off tomorrow, he meant, and he 
lay smoking his cigarette and talking of what he would 
do when he was about again. He would see about get- 
ting his car repaired first thing; have to take it in to 
Memphis, probably. And he planned a trip for the 
three of them — Miss Jenny, Narcissa and himself — 
while the car was in the shop. “It’ll take about a week,” 
he added. “She must be in pretty bad shape. Hope I 

didn’t hurt her guts any.” 

“But you aren’t going to drive it fast any more, 
she reminded him. He lay still, lus cigarette burning 
in his fingers. “You promised,” she insisted. 

“When did I promise .J”’ 

“Don’t you remember? That . . . afternoon, when 

they were ...” , . i • **1. 

“When I scared you?” She sat watching him with 

her grave, troubled eyes. “Come here,” he said. She 
rose and went to the bed and he took her hand. 

“You won’t drive it fast again?” she persisted. 

“No,” he answered, “I promise.” And they were still 
so, her hand in his. The curtains stirred in the breeze, 
and the leaves on the branch beyond the w'ndow twin 
kled rind turned and lisped against one another. 
was not far away. The breeze would cease then. He 


“““Srcissa,” he said. She looked at him. “Lean your 

face down here.” , .1 ^ 

She looked away, and for a while there was no mo%c 

ment, no sound between them. 

260 



“I must go,” she said at last, quietly, and he released 
her hand. 

His cast was gone, and he was up and about again, 
moving a little gingerly, to be sure, but already Miss 
Jenny was beginning to contemplate him a little anx- 
iously. “If we could just arrange to have one of his 
minor bones broken every month or so, just enough to 
keep him in the house . , 

“That won’t be necessary,” Narcissa told her. “He’s 
going to beliave from now on.” 

“How do you know?” Miss Jenny demanded. “What 
in tlie world makes you think that?” 

“He promised he would.” 

“He’ll promise anything when he’s flat on his back.” 
Miss Jenny retorted. “They all will; always Imve. But 
what makes you think he’ll keep it?” 

“He promised me he would,” Narcissa replied 
serenely. 

His first act was to see about his car. It had been 
pulled into town and patched up after a fashion until 
it would run under its own power, but it would be 
necessary to take it to Memphis to have the frame 
straightened and the body repaired. Bayard was all 
for doing this himself, fresh-knit ribs and all, but ISIiss 
Jenny put her foot down, and after a furious half hour 
he was vanquished. And so the car was driven in to 
Memphis by a youth who hung around one of the 
garages m town. “Narcissa’Il take you driving in her 
car, if you must ride,” Miss Jenny told him. 

' '1 peanut-parcher?” Bayard said de- 

twenty-one miles.” 

INo, thank God, Miss Jenny answered. “And I’ve 

'* 261 


written to Memphis and asked ’em to fix yours so it’ll 
run just like that, too.” 

Bayard stared at her witli humorless bleakness. “Did 
you do any such damn thing as that.^” 

“Oh, take him away, Narcissa,” Miss Jenny ex- 
claimed. *^Get him out of my sight. I’m so tired looking 
at you.” 

But he wouldn’t ride in Narcissa’s car at first. He 
missed no opportunity to sp)eak of it with heavy, face- 
tious disparagement, but he wouldn’t ride in it. Dr. 
Alford had evolved a tight elastic bandage for his chest 
so that he could ride his horse, but he had developed an 
astonishing propensity for lounging about the house 
when Narcissa was there. And Narcissa came quite 
often. Miss Jenny thought it was on Bayard’s account 
and pinned the guest down in her forthright way; 
whereupon Narcissa told her about Horace and Belle 
while Miss Jenny sat indomitably erect on her straight 
chair beside tlie piano. 

“Poor child,” she said, and: “Lord, ain’t they fools?” 
And then: “Well, you’re right; I wouldn’t marry one 
of ’em either.” 

noV’ Narcissa answered. wish there weren t 
any of tliem in the world.” 

Miss Jenny said “Hmph.” 

And then one afternoon they were in Narcissa’s car 
and Bayard was driving, over her protest at first. Bu 
he was behaving himself quite sensibly, and at last she 
relaxed. Tliey drove down the valley road and turned 
into the hills and she asked where they were going, but 
his answer was vague. So she sat quietly beside him an 
the road mounted presently in long curves among darK 
pines in the slanting afternoon. The road wound on, 

262 



with changing sun-shot vistas of the valley and the 
opposite hills at every turn, and always the somber 
pines and their faint, exhilarating odor. After a time 
they topped a hill and Bayard slowed the car. Beneath 
them the road sank, then flattened away toward a line 
of willows, crossed a stone bridge, and rose again, 
curving redly from sight among the dark trees. 

“There’s the place,” he said. 


“The place she repeated dreamily; then as the car 
rolled forward again, gaining speed, she roused herself 
and understood what he meant. “You promised!” she 
cried, but he jerked the throttle down the ratchet, and 
she clutched him and tried to scream. But she could 
make no sound, nor could she close her eyes as the nar- 
row bridge hurtled dancing toward them. And then 
her breath stopped and her heart as they flashed, with 
a sharp reverberation like hail on a tin roof, between 
allows and a crashing glint of water and shot on up 
the next hill. The small car swayed on the curve, lost 
lU footing and went into the ditch, bounded out and 
hurled across the road. Then Bayard straightened it 
out and with diminishing speed it rocked on up the hill 
and stopped. She sat beside him, her bloodless mouth 
open, beseeching him with her wide, hopeless eves Then 
she caught her breath, wailing. 

“I didn’t mean ” he began awkwardly. “I lust 

wanted to see if I could do it,” and he put his arms 
around her and she clung to him, moving her hands 

crazily about his shoulders. “I didn’t mean ” he 

essayed again, and then her crazed hands were on his 
tace and she was sobbing wildly against his mouth. 


263 


9 


All the forenoon he bent over his ledgers, watching 
his liand pen the neat figures into the ruled columns 
with a sort of astonishment. After his sleepless night 
he labored in a kind of stupor, his mind too spent even 
to contemplate the coiling images of his lust, thwarted 
now for all time, save with a dull astonishment that the 
images no longer filled his blood with fury and despair, 
so that it was some time before his dulled nerves re- 
acted to a fresh threat and caused him to raise his head. 
Virgil Beard w’as just entering the door. 

He slid hurriedly from his stool and slipped around 
the corner and darted through the door of old Bayard’s 
office. He crouched within the door, heard the boy ask 
politely for him, heard the cashier say that he was 
there a minute ago but that he reckoned he had stepped 
out ; heard the boy say, well, he reckoned he’d wait for 
him. And he crouched within the door, wiping his 
drooling mouth with his handkerchief. 

After a while he opened the door cautiously. The 
boy squatted ])aticntly and blandly on his heels against 
the wall, and Snopes stood again with his clenched and 
trembling hands. He did not curse: his desperate fury 
w'as hevond words, but his breath came and went with a 
sw'ift ah-ah-ah sound in his throat and it seemed to him 
that his eyeballs were being drawn back into his skull, 
turning further and further until the cords that drew 
them reached the snapping point. He opened the door. 

“Hi, Mr. Snopes,” the boy said genially, rising. 
Snopes strode on and entered the grille and approached 

the cashier. , 

“Res,” he said in a voice scarcely articulate, gimme 

five dollars.” 


264 ! 



“What?” 

“Gimme five dollars,’* he repeated hoarsely. The 
cashier did so, and scribbled a notation and speared it 
on the file beside him. The boy had come up to the 
window, but Snopes went on and he followed the man 
back to the office, his bare feet hissing on the linoleum 
floor. 

“I tried to find you last night,” he explained. “But 
you wasn’t to home.” Then he looked up and saw 
Snopes’ face, and after a moment he screamed and 
broke his trance and turned to flee. But the man caught 
him by his overalls, and he writhed and twisted, scream- 
ing with utter terror as the man dragged him across the 
office and opened the door that gave upon the vacant 
lot. Snopes was trying to say something in his mad, 
shaking voice, but the boy screamed steadily, hanging 
limp from the other’s hand as he tried to thrust the bill 
into his pocket. At last he succeeded and released the 
boy, who staggered away, found his legs and fled. 

“What were you whuppin’ that boy, for?” the 

cashier asked curiously, when Snopes returned to his 
desk. 

“For not minding his own business,” he snapped, 
opening his ledger again. 

As he crossed the now empty square he looked up at 

the lighted face of the clock. It was ten minutes past 

eleven. There was no sign of life save tlie lonely figure 

of the night marshal in the door of the lighted post- 
office lobby. 

He left the square and entered a street and went 

arc lights, having the street to 
himself and the regular recapitulation of his striding 
shadow dogging him out of the darkness, through the 

S65 


pool of the light and into darkness again. He turned a 
comer and followed a yet quieter street and turned 
presently from it into a lane between massed banks of 
honeysuckle higher than his head and sweet on the 
night air. The lane was dark and he increased his pace. 
On either hand the upper stories of houses rose above 
the honeysuckle, with now and then a lighted window 
among the dark trees. He kept close to the wall and 
went swiftly on, passing now between back premises. 
After a while another house loomed, and a serried row 
of cedars against the paler sky, and he stole beside a 
stone wall and so came opposite the garage. He stopped 
here and sought in the lush grass beneath the wall and 
stooped and picked up a pole, which he leaned against 
the wall. With the aid of the pole he mounted on to 
the wall and thence to the garage roof. 

The house was dark, and presently he slid to the 
ground and stole across the lawn and stopped beneath 
a window. There was a light somewhere toward the 
front, but no sound, no movement; and he stood for a 
time listening, darting his eyes this way and that, 
covert and ceaseless as a cornered animal. 

The screen responded easily to his knife, and he 
raised it and listened again. Then with a single scram- 
bling motion he was in the room, crouching. Still no 
sound save the thudding of his heart, and the whole 
house gave off that unmistakable emanation of ten^ 
porary desertion. He drew out his handkerchief and 
wiped his mouth. 

The light was in the next room, and he went on. The 
stairs rose from the end of this room and he scuttled 
silently across it and mounted swiftly into the upper 
darkness and groped forward until he touched a wall, 
then a door. The knob turned in his fingers. 

266 



It was the right room; he knew that at once. Her 
presence was all about him, and for a time his heart 
thudded and thudded in his throat and fury and lust 
and despair shook him. He pulled himself together; 
he must get out quickly, and he groped his way across 
to the bed and lay face down on it, his head buried in 
the pillows, writhing and making smothered, animal- 
like meanings. But he must get out, and he got up and 
groped across the room again. What little light there 
was was beliind him now, and instead of finding the 
door, he blundered into a chest of drawers, and stood 
there a moment, learning its shape with his hands. 
Then he opened one of the drawers and fumbled in it. 
It was filled with a faintly-scented fragility of gar- 
ments, but he could not distinguish one from another 
with his hands. 

He found a match in his pocket and struck it be- 
neath the shelter of his palm, and by its Iigl»t he chose 
one of the soft garments, discovering as the match died 
a packet of letters in the corner of the drawer. He 
recognized them at once, dropped the dead match to 
the floor and took the packet from the drawer and put 
it in his pocket, and placed the letter he had just writ- 
ten in the drawer, and he stood for a time with the 
garment crushed against his face ; remained so for some 
time before a sound caused him to jerk his head up, 
listening. A car was entering the drive, and as he 
sprang to the window its lights swept beneath him and 
fell full upon the open garage, and he crouched at the 
window in a panic. Then he sped to the door and 

^opp^ again, crouching, panting and snarling with 
indecision. 

He ran back to the window. The garage was dark, 
and two dark figures were approaching the house, and 

«67 


he crouched beside the window until they had passed 
from siglit. Then, still clutching the garment, he 
climbed out the window and swung from the sill a 
moment by his hands, and closed his eyes and dropped. 

A crash of glass, and he sprawled numbed by shock 
amid lesser crashes and a burst of stale, dry dust. He 
had fallen into a shallow flower-pit and he scrambled out 
and tried to stand and fell again, while nausea swirled 
in him. It was his knee, and he lay sick and with drawn, 
gasping lips while his trouser leg sopped slowly and 
warmly, clutching the garment and staring at the 
dark sky with wide, mad eyes. He heard voices in the 
house, and a light came on behind the window above 
him and he turned crawling, and at a scrambling hob- 
ble he crossed the lawn and plunged into the shadow 
of the cedars beside the garage, where he lay watching 
the window in which a man leaned, peering out; and 
he moaned a liUle while his blood ran between his 
clasped fingers. He drove himself onward again and 
dragged his bleeding leg up on to the wall, and dropped 
into the lane and cast the pole down. A hundred yards 
further he stopped and drew his torn trousers aside and 
tried to bandage the gash in his leg. But ^he handker- 
chief stained over almost at once and still blood ran 

and ran down his leg and into his shoe. 

Once in the back room of the bank he rolled his 
trouser leg up and removed the handkerchief and 
bathed the gash at the lavatory. It still bled, and the 
sight of his own blood sickened him, and he sway 

against the wall, watching his blood Then he remov d 

his shirt and bound it as tightly as he 'jj 

leg. He still felt nausea, and he drank long of the tep 
wLr from the tap. Immediately it welled salinely 
within him and he clung to the lavatory, sweating, try 

268 



ing not to vomit, until the spell passed. His leg felt 
numb and dead, and he was weak and he wished to lie 
down, but he dared not. 

He entered tiie grille, his left heel showing a red 
print at each step. The vault door opened soundlessly; 
witliout a light he found the key to the cash box and 
opened it. He took only bank notes, but he took all he 
could find. Then he closed the vault and locked it, re- 
turned to the lavatory and w’etted a towel and removed 
his heel prints from the linoleum floor. Then he passed 
out the back door, threw the latch so it would lock 
behind him. The clock on the courthouse rang mid- 
night. 

In an alley between two negro stores a negro man sat 
in a battered Ford, waiting. He gave the negro a bill 
and the negro cranked the engine and came and stared 
curiously at the bloody cloth beneatli his torn trousers. 
“Whut happened, boss.^* Y’ain’t hurt, is you.^*” 

“Run into some wire,” he answered shortly. “Slie’s 
got plenty gas, ain’t she?” The negro said yes, and he 
drove on. As he crossed the square the marshal, Buck, 
stood beneath the light before the post office, and 
Snopes cursed him with silent and bitter derision. He 
drove on and entered another street and passed from 

view, and presently the sound of his going had died 
away. 


269 


PART FOUR 


It was a sunny Sunday afternoon in October. Nar- 
cissa and Bayard had driven off soon after dinner, and 
Miss Jenny and old Bayard were sitting on the sunny 
end of the veranda when, preceded by Simon, the 
deputation came solemnly around the corner of the 
house from the rear. It consisted of six negroes in a 
catholic variety of Sunday raiment and it was headed 
by a huge, bull-necked negro in a hind-side-before col- 
lar and a Prince Albert coat, with an orotund air and 
a wild, compelling eye. 

“Yere dey is. Gunnel,” Simon said, and without 
pausing he mounted the steps and turned about, leav- 
ing no doubt in any one’s mind as to which side he 
considered himself aligned with. The deputation halted 

and milled a little, solemnly decorous. 

“What’s this.?” Miss Jenny asked. “That you. Uncle 

Bird?” 

“Yessura, Miss Jenny.” One of the committee un- 
covered his grizzled wool and bowed. “How you gittin 
on?” The others shuffled their feet, and one by one they 
removed their hats. The leader clasped his across his 

chest like a Congressman being photo^a^. 

“Here, Simon,” old Bayard demanded, Vhat s thisi' 

270 



What did you bring these niggers around here forP” 

“Dey come fer dey money,” Simon explained. 

“What?” 

“Money?” Miss Jenny repeated with interest. “What 
money, Simon?” 

“Dey come fer dat money you promised ’um,” Simon 
shouted. 

“I told you I wasn’t going to pay that money,” old 
Bayard said. “Did Simon tell you I was going to pay 
it?” he demanded of the deputation. 

“What money?” Miss Jenny repeated. “What are 
you talking about, Simon?” The leader of the commit- 
tee was shaping his face for words, but Simon fore- 
stalled him. 

“Why, Gunnel, you tole me yo’self to tell dem 
niggers you wuz gwine pay ’um.” 

“I didn’t do any such thing,” old Bayard answered 
violently. “I told you that if they wanted to put you 
in jail, to go ahead and do it. That’s what I told you.” 

“Why, Gunnel. You said it jes’ ez plain. You jes* 

fergot erbout it. I kin prove it by Miss Jenny you tole 
me ” 

“Not by me,” Miss Jenny interrupted. “This is the 
first I heard about it. Whose money is it, Simon?” 

Simon gave her a pained, reproachful look. “He tole 
me to tell ’um he wuz gwine pay it.” 

“I’m damned if I did,” old Bayard shouted. “I told 

you I wouldn’t pay a damn cent of it. And I told you 

that if you let ’em worry me about it, I’d skin you alive, 
sir.” 

“I ain’t gwine let ’um worry you,” Simon answered, 
soothingly. “Dat’s whut I’m fixin’ now. You jes’ give 
’um dey money, en me en you kin fix it up later.” 

*71 



“I’ll be eternally damned if I will; if I let a lazy 

nigger that ain’t worth his keep ” 

“But somebody got to pay ’urn,” Simon pointed out 
patiently. “Ain’t dat right, Miss Jenny?” 

“That’s right,” Miss Jenny agreed. “But I ain’t the 


one. 




“Yessuh, dey ain’t no argument dat somebody got 
to pay ’um. Ef somebody don’t quiet ’um down, dey’U 
put me in de jail. And den whut’ll y’all do, widout 
nobody to keep dem bosses fed en clean, en to clean de 
house en wait on de table? Co’se I don’t mine gwine to 
jail, even ef dem stone flo’s ain’t gwine do my mis’ry 
no good.” And ho drew a long and affecting picture, of 
high, grail-like principles and of patient abnegation. 
Old Bayard slammed his feet to the floor. 

“How much is it?” 

The leader swelled within his Prince Albert. “Brud- 
der Mo’,” he said, “will you read out de total 
emoluments owed to de pupposed Secon’ Baptis’ Church 
by de late Deacon Strother in his capacity ez treasurer 
of de church boa’d?” 

Brother Moore created a mild disturbance in the rear 
of the group, emerging presently by the agency of 
sundry willing hands — a small, reluctant ebon negro 
in somber, overlarge black — where the parson majes- 
tically made room for him, contriving by some means 
to focus attention on him. He laid his hat on the ground 
at his feet and from the right-hand pocket of his coat 
he produced in order a red bandana handkerchief, a 
shoe-horn, a plug of chewing-tobacco, and holding 
these in his free hand he delved again, with an expres- 
sion of mildly conscientious alarm. Then he replaced 
the objects, knd from his left pocket he produced a 


272 



pocket knife, a stick on which was wound a length of 
soiled twine, a short piece of leather strap attached to 
a rusty and apparently idle buckle, and leistly a greasy, 
dog-eared notebook. He crammed the other things back 
into his pocket, dropping the strap, which he stooped 
and recovered; then he and the parson held a brief 
whispered conversation. He opened the notebook and 
fumbled at the leaves, fumbled at them until the parson 
leaned over his shoulder and found the proper page 
and laid his finger on it. 

“How much is it, reverend?” old Bayard asked 
impatiently. 

“Brudder Mo’ will now read out de amount,” the 
parson intoned. Brother Moore looked at the page with 
his tranced gaze and mumbled something in a prac- 
tically indistinguishable voice. 

“What?” old Bayard demanded, cupping his ear. 

“Make ’im talk out,” Simon said. “Can’t nobody tell 
whut he sayin*.” 

“Louder,” the parson rumbled, with just a trace of 
impatience. 

“Sixty-sevmm dollars en fawty cents,” Brother 
Moore enunciated at last. Old Bayard slammed back 
in his chair and swore for a long minute while Simon 
watched him with covert anxiety. Then he rose and 
tramped up the veranda and into the house, still swear- 
ing. Simon sighed and relaxed. The deputation milled 
again, and Brother Moore faded briskly into the rear 
of it. The parson, however, still retained his former 
attitude of fateful and impressive profundity. 

“What became of that money, Simon?” Miss Jenny 
asked curiously. “You had it, didn’t you?” 

“Dat’s whut dey claims,” Simon answered. 

273 


“What did you do with it?” 

“Hit’s all right,” Simon assured her. “I jes’ put it 
out, sort of.” 

“I bet you did,” she agreed drily. “I bet it never 
even got cool while you had it. They deserve to lose it 
for ever giving it to you in the first place. Who did you 
put it out to?” 

“Oh, me en Gunnel done fix dat up,” Simon said 
easily, “long time ago.” Old Bayard tramped in the 
hall again and emerged, flapping a check in his hand. 

“Here,” he commanded, and the parson approached 
the railing and took it and folded it away in his pocket. 
“And if you folks arc fools enough to turn any more 
money over to him, don’t come to me for it, you hear?” 
He glared at tlie deputation a moment; then he glared 
at Simon. “And the next time you steal money and 
come to me to pay it back, I’m going to have you ar- 
rested and prosecute you myself. Get those niggers out 
of here.” 

The deputation had already stirred with a concerted 
movement, but the parson halted them with a com- 
manding hand. He faced Simon again. “Deacon 
Strother,” he said, “ez awdained minister of de late 
Fust Baptis’ Church, en recalled minister of de puj^ 
posed Secon’ Baptis’ Church, en chairman of dis 
committee, I hereby reinfests you wid yo’ fawmer 
capacities of deacon in de said pupposed Secon’ Baptis^ 
Church. Amen. Gunnel Sartoris and ma’am, good day.’ 
Then he turned and herded his committee from the 

scene. . j „ o* 

“Thank de Lawd, we got dat offen our mind, Simon 

said, and he came and lowered himself to the top step, 
groaning pleasurably. 


274 



“And you remember what I said,” old Bayard 
warned him. “One more time, now ” 

But Simon was craning his head in the direction the 
church board had taken. “Dar, now,” he said, “whut 
you reckon dey wants now?” For the committee had 
returned and it now peered diffidently around the 
comer of the house. 

“Well?” old Bayard demanded. “What is it now?” 

They were trying to thrust Brother Moore forward 
again, but he won, this time. At last the parson spoke. 

“You fergot de fawty cents, white folks.’^ 

“What?” 

“He says, you lef’ out de extry fawty cents,” Simon 
shouted. Old Bayard exploded; Miss Jenny clapped 
her hands to her ears and the committee rolled its eyes 
in fearsome admiration while he soared to magnificent 
heights, alighting finally on Simon. 

“You give him that forty cents, and get ’em out of 
here,” old Bayard stormed. “And if you ever let ’em 
come back here again, I’ll take a horsewhip to the whole 
passel of you !” 

Lawd, Gunnel, I ain’t got no fawty cents, en you 
knows it. Can’t dey do widout dat, after gittin’ de 
balance of it?” 

“Yes, you have, Simon,” Miss Jenny said. “You had 
a half a dollar left after I ordered those shoes for you 

last night.” Again Simon looked at her with pained 
astonishment. 

Give it to ’em,” old Bayard commanded. Slowly 
Simon reached into his pocket and produced a half 
dollar and turned it slowly in his palm. 

money. Gunnel,” he protested. 

Seems like dey mought leave me dis.” 

275 


“Give ’em that money!” old Bayard thundered. “I 
reckon you can pay forty cents of it, at least.” Simon 
rose reluctantly, and the parson approached. 

“Wliar’s my dime change.^” Simon demanded, nor 
would he surrender the coin until two nickels were in 
his hand. Then the committee departed. 

“Now,” old Ba3'ard said, “I want to know what you 
did with that money.” 

“Well, suh,” Simon began readily, “it wuz like dis. 
I put dat monej' out.” Miss Jenny rose. 

“My Lord, are you all going over that again?” And 
she left them. In her room, where she sat in a sunny 
window, she could still hear them — old Bayard’s stormy 
rage and Simon’s bland and plausible evasion, rising 
and falling on the drowsy Sabbath air. 

There was a rose, a single remaining rose. Through 
the sad, dead days of late summer it liad continued to 
bloom, and now though persimmons had long swung 
their miniature suns among the caterpillar-festooned 
branches, and gum and maple and hickory had flaunted 
two gold and scarlet weeks, and the grass, where grand- 
fathers of grasshoppers squatted sluggishly like sullen 
octogenarians, had been penciled twice delicately with 
frost, and tlie sunny noons were scented with sassafras, 
it still bloomed — overripe now, and a little gallantly 
blowsjs like a fading burlesque star. Miss Jenny worked 
in a sweater these days, and her trowel glinted in her 

earthy glove. t * i- 

“It’s like some women I’ve known,” she said. “It just 

don’t know how to give up gracefully and be a grand- 
mamma.” ^ . t J !r 

“Let it have the summer out,” Narcissa in 

woolen dress protested. She had a trowel too, and she 

276 



pottered serenely after Miss Jenny’s scolding and brisk 
impatience, accomplishing nothing. Worse than noth- 
ing, worse than Isom even, because she demoralized 
Isom, who had immediately given his unspoken al- 
legiance to the left, or passive, wing. “It’s entitled to 
its summer.” 

“Some folks don’t know when summer’s over,” Miss 
Jenny rejoined. “Indian summer’s no excuse for senile 
adolescence.” 

“It isn’t senility, either.” 

“All right. You’ll see, some day.” 

“Oh, some day. I’m not quite prepared to be a grand- 
mother, yet.” 

“You’re doing pretty well.” Miss Jenny troweled a 
tulip bulb carefully and exi>ertly up and removed the 
clotted earth from its roots. “We seem to liave pretty 
well worn out Bayard, for the time being,” she con- 
tinued. “I reckon we’d better name him John this time.” 

“Yes ?” 

“Yes,” Aliss Jenny repeated. “We’ll name him John. 
You, Isomi” 

Tlie gin had been running steadily for a month, 
now, what with the Sartoris cotton and that of other 
planters further up the valley, and of smaller croppers 
with their tilted fields among the hills. The Sartoris 
place was farmed on shares. Afost of the tenants had 
picked their cotton, and gathered the late corn ; and of 
late afternoons, with Indian summer on the land and 
an ancient sadness sharp os wood-smoke on the windless 
air, Bayard and Narcissa would drive out where, be- 
side a spring on the edge of the woods, the negroes 
rought their cane and made their communal \^inter 
sorghum molasses. One of the negroes, a sort of patri- 

277 


arch among the tenants, owned the mill and the mule 
that furnished the motive power. He did the grinding 
and superintended the cooking of the sap for a tithe, 
and when Bayard and Narcissa arrived the mule would 
l>e plodding in its monotonous and patient circle, its 
feet rustling in the dried cane-pith, while one of the 
patriarch’s grandsons fed the cane into the crusher. 

Hound and round the mule went, setting its narrow, 
deerlike feet delicately down in the hissing cane-pith, 
its neck bobbing limber as a section of rubber hose in 
the collar, with its trace-galled flanks and flopping, life- 
less ears and its half-closed eyes drowsing venomously 
behind pale lids, apparently asleep with the monotony 
of its own motion. Some Homer of the cotton fields 
should sing the saga of the mule and of his place in 
the South. He it was, more than any other one creature 
or thing, who, steadfast to the land when all else 
faltered before the hopeless juggernaut of circum- 
stance, impervious to conditions that broke men’s hearts 
because of his venomous and patient preoccupation with 
the immediate present, won the prone South from b^ 
neath the iron heel of Reconstruction and taught it 
pride again through humility, and courage through 
adversity overcome; who accomplished the well-nigh 
impossible despite hopeless odds, by sheer and vindic- 
tive patience. Father and mother he does not resemble, 
sons and daughters he will never have; vindictive and 
patient (it is a known fact that he will labor ten years 
willingly and patiently for you, for the privilege o 
kicking you once) ; solitary but without pride, se 
sufficient but without vanity; his voice is his oiro 
derision. Outcast and pariah, he has neither friend, 
wife, mistress, nor sweetheart; celibate, he is unscarre , 
possesses neither pillar nor desert cave, he is not as 

278 



saulted by temptations nor flagellated by dreams nor 
assuaged by vision ; faith, hope and charity are not his. 
Misanthropic, he labors six days without reward for 
one creature whom he hates, bound with chains to an- 
other whom he despises, and spends the seventh day 
kicking or being kicked by his fellows. Misunderstood 
even by that creature, the nigger who drives him, whose 
impulses and mental processes most closely resemble his, 
he performs alien actions in alien surroundings; he 
finds bread not only for a race, but for an entire form 
of behavior ; meek, his inheritance is cooked away from 
him along with his soul in a glue factory. Ugly, un- 
tiring and perverse, he can be moved neither by reason, 
flattery, nor promise of reward ; he performs his humble 
monotonous duties without complaint, and his meed is 
blows. Alive, he is haled through the Tvorld, an object 
of general derision; unwept, unhonored and unsung, he 
bleaches his awkward accusing bones among rusting 
cans and broken crockery and worn-out automobile 
tires on lonely hillsides while his flesh soars unawares 
against the blue in the craws of buzzards. 

As they approached, the groaning and creaking of 
the mill would be the first intimation, unless the wind 
happened to blow toward them; then it would be the 
sharp, subtly exciting odor of fermentation and of 
boiling molasses. Bayard liked the smell of it and they 
would drive up and stop for a time while the boy 
rolled his eyes covertly at them as he fed cane into the 
mill, while they watched the patient mule and the old 
man stooped over the simmering pot. Sometimes Bay- 
ard got out and went over and talked to him, leaving 
Narcissa in the car, lapped in the ripe odors of the 
failing year and all its rich, vague sadness, her gaze 
brooding on Bayard and the old negro— the one lean 

«79 


and tall and fatally young and the other stooped with 
time, and her spirit went out in serene and steady 
waves, surrounding him unawares. 

Then he would return and get in beside her and she 
w'Quld touch his rough clothing, but so lightly that he 
was not conscious of it, and they would drive back 
along the faint, uneven road, beside the flaunting 
woods, and soon, above turning locusts and oaks, the 
wliite house simple and huge and steadfast, and the 
orange disk of tlie harvest moon getting above the 
ultimate hills, ripe as cheese. 

Sometimes they went back after dark. The mill was 
still then, its long arm motionless across the firclit 
scene. The mule was munching in stable, or stamping 
and nuzzling its empty manger, or asleep standing, 
boding not of tomorrow; and against the firelight 
many shadows moved. The negroes had gathered now: 
old men and women sitting on crackling cushions of 
cane about the blaze wliich one of their number fed 
with pressed stalks until its incense-laden fury swirled 
licking at the boughs overhead, making more golden 
still the twinkling golden leaves; and young men and 
girls, and children squatting and still as animals, 
staring into the fire. Sometimes they sang — quavering 
wordless chords in which plaintive minors blent w'lth 
mellow bass in immemorial and sad suspense, their 
grave dark faces bent to the flames and with no motion 

of lips. . , 

But when the white folks arrived the singing ceased, 

and they sat or lay about the fire on which the blac ene 

pot simmered, talking in broken, murmurous overtones 
ready with sorrowful mirth, while in shadowy e 
among the dry whispering cane-stalks youths an gir 

murmured and giggled. 


280 



Always one of them, and sometimes both, stopped in 
the office where old Bayard and Miss Jenny were. 
There w&s a fire of logs on the hearth now and they 
would sit in the glow of it — Miss Jenny beneath the 
light witli her lurid daily paper; old Bayard with his 
slippered feet propped against the fireplace, his head 
wreathed in smoke and the old setter dreaming fitfully 
beside* his cliair, reliving proud and ancient stands 
perhaps, or further back still, the lean, gawky days of 
his young doghood, when the world was full of scents 
that maddened the blood in him and pride had not 
taught him self-restraint; Narcissa and Bayard be- 
tween them — Narcissa dreaming too in the firelight, 
grave and tranquil, and young Bayard smoking his 
cigarettes in his leashed and moody repose. 

At last old Bayard would throw his cigar into the 
fire and drop his feet to the floor, and the dog would 
wake and raise its head and blink and yawn with such 
gaping deliberation that Narcissa, watching him, in- 
variably yawned also. 

“Well, Jenny ?” 

Miss Jenny w’ould lay her paper aside and rise. “Let 
me,” Narcissa would say. “Let me go.” But Miss Jenny 
never would, and presently she w'ould return with a 
tray and three glasses, and old Bayard would unlock 
his desk and fetch the silver-stoppered decanter and 
compound three toddies with ritualistic care. 

Once Bayard persuaded her into khaki and boots 
and carried her ’possum-hunting. Cospey with a 
streaked lantern and a cow’s horn slung over his 
shoulder, and Isom with a gunny sack and an ax and 
four shadowy, restless hounds waited for them at the 
lot gate and they set off among ghostly shocks of 

281 


corn, where every day Bayard kicked up a covey of 
quail, toward the woods. 

“Where we going to start tonight, Caspey?” Bay- 
ard asked. 

“Back of Unc’ Henry’s. Dey’s one in dat grapevine 
beliine de cotton house. Blue treed ’im down dar las’ 
night.” 

“How do you know he’s there tonight, Caspey?” 
Narcissa asked. 

“He be back,” Caspey answered confidently. “He 
right dar now, watchin’ dis lantern wid his eyes 
scrooched up, listenin’ to hear ef de dawgs wid us.” 

They climbed through a fence and Caspey stooped 
and set the lantern down. The dogs moiled and tugged 
about his legs with sniffings and throaty growls at one 
another as he unleashed them. “You, Ruby ! Stan’ still, 
dar. Hole up here, you potlickin’ fool.” They whim- 
pered and surged, tlieir eyes melting in fluid brief 
gleams ; then they faded soundlessly and swiftly into 
the darkness. “Give ’um a little time,” Caspey said, 
’um see ef he dar yit.” From the darkness ahead a 
dog yapped three times on a high note. “Dat s dat 
young dog,” Caspey said. “Jes’ showin’ off. He ain’t 
smelt nothin’.” Overhead the stars swam vaguely in the 
hazy sky ; the air was not yet chill, the earth still warm 
to the touch. They stood in a steady oasis of lantern 
light in a world of but one dimension, a vague cistern 
of darkness filled with meager light and topped with an 
edgeless canopy of ragged stars. The lantera was 
smoking and emanating a faint odor of heat. Caspey 
raised it and turned the wick down and set it at his 
feet again. Then from the darkness there came a single 

note, resonant and low and grave. 

“Dar he,” Isom said. 

28 ^ 



“Hit’s Ruby,” Cospey agreed, picking up the 
lantern. “She got ’im.” The young dog yapped again, 
with fierce hysteria; then the single low cry chimed. 
Narcissa slid her arm through Bayard’s. “ ’Tain’t no 
rush,” Caspey told her. “Dey ain’t treed yit. Whooy. 
H’mawn, dawg.” The young dog had ceased its yap- 
ping, but still at intervals the other one bayed her 
single timbrous note, and they followed it. “H’mawn, 
dawg !” 

They stumbled a little over fading plow scars, after 
Caspey’s bobbing lantern, and the darkness went sud- 
denly crescendo with short, steady cries in four keys. 
“Dey got ’im,” Isom said. 

“Dat’s right,” Caspey agreed. “Le’s go. Hold ’im, 
dawg!” They trotted now, Narcissa clinging to Bay- 
ard’s arm, and plunged through rank grass and over 
another fence and so among trees. Eyes gleamed fieet- 
ingly from the darkness ahead ; another gust of barking 
interspersed with tense, eager whimperings, and among 
stumbling half-lit shadows dogs surged about them, 
“He up dar,” Caspey said. “Ole Blue sees ’im.” 

“Dar Unc* Henry’s dawg, too,” Isom said. 

Caspey grunted. “I knowed he’d be here. He can’t 
keep up wid a ’possum no mo’, but jes let a dawg tree 
whar he kin hear ’im . . He set the lantern on his 
head and peered up into the vine-matted sapling, and 
Bayard drew a flash light from his pocket and turned 
its beam into the tree. The three older hounds and 
Uncle Henry’s ancient, moth-eaten beast sat in a tense 
circle about the tree, whimpering or barking in short 
spaced gusts, but the young one yapped steadily in 
mad, hysterical rushes. “Kick dat puppy still,” Caspey 
commanded. 

“You, Ginger, hush yo’ mouf,” Isom shouted. He 

283 


laid his ax and sack down and caught the puppy and 
held it between his knees. Caspey and Bayard moved 
slowly about the tree, among the eager dogs. Narcissa 
followed them. 

“Dem vines is so thick up dar . . Caspey said. 

“Here he is,” Bayard said suddenly. “I’ve got ’im.” 
He steadied his light and Caspey moved behind him 
and looked over his shoulder. 


“Where?” Narcissa asked. “Can you see it?” 

“Dat’s right,” Caspey agreed. “Dar he is. Ruby 
don’t lie. When she say he dar, he dar.” 

“Where is he, Ba^'ard?” Narcissa repeated. He drew 
her before him and trained the light over her head, into 
the tree, and presently from the massed vines two red- 
dish points of fire not a match-breadth apart gleamed 
at her, winked out, then shone again. 

“He movin’,” Caspey said. “Young ’possum. Git up 
dar and shake ’im out, Isom.” Bayard held his light on 
the creature’s eyes and Caspey set his lantern down 
and herded the dogs together at his knees. Isom 
scrambled up into the tree and vanished in the mass of 
vine, but they could follow his progress by the shaking 
branches and his panting ejaculations as he threatened 
the animal with a mixture of cajolery and adjuration. 

“Hah,” he grunted, “ain’t gwine hurt you. Am t 
gwine do nothin’ ter you but th’ow you in de cook-pot. 
Look out, mister, I’se cornin’ up dar.” More commo- 
tion; 'it ceased, they could hear 
branches cautiously. “Here he,” he called suddenly. 

“Hole dem dawgs, now.” 

“Little ’un, ain’t he?” Casj^y ^hed. 

“Can’t tell. Can’t see nothin but his fa«. 
dem dawgs ” The upper part of the sapling burst into 

Sent Ind sustaineTfury ; Isom whooped louder and 

284 



louder as he shook the branches. “Whooy, here he 
comes,” he shouted, and something dropped sluggishly 
and reluctantly from branch to invisible branch, 
stopped; and the dogs set up a straining clamor. The 
thing fell again, and Bayard’s light followed a lumpy 
object that plumped with a resounding thud to the 
ground and vanished immediately beneath a swirl of 
hounds. 

Caspey and Bayard leaped among them with shouts 
and at last succeeded in dragging them clear, and 
Narcissa saw the creature in the pool of the flash light, 
lying on its side in a grinning curve, its eyes closed and 
its pink, babylike hands doubled against its breast. 
She looked at the motionless thing with pity and dis- 
tinct loathing — such a paradox, its vulpine, skull-like 
grin and those tiny, human-looking hands, and the 
long ratlike tail of it. Isom dropped from the tree and 
Caspey turned the three straining clamorous dogs he 
held over to his nephew and picked up the ax, and 
while Narcissa watched in shrinking curiosity, he laid 
the ax across the thing’s neck and put his foot on either 
end of the helve, and grasped tlie animal’s tail, . . , 
She turned and fled, her hand to her mouth. 

But the wall of darkness stopped her and she stood 
trembling and a little sick, watching them as they 
moved about the lantern. Then Caspey drove the dogs 
away* giving Uncle Henry’s octogenarian a hearty and 
resounding kick that sent him homeward with blood- 
curdling and astonished wails, and Isom swung the 

lumpy sack to his shoulder and Bayard turned and 
looked for her. “Narcissa.^” 

“Here,” she answered. He came to her. 

“That’s one. We ought to get a dozen, tonight.” 

Oh, no, she shuddered. **No.” He peered at her ; 

^85 


K 


then he snapped his flash light full on her face. She 
lifted her hand and put it aside. 

“What’s the matter? Not tired already, are you?” 

“No.” She went on, “I just . . . Come on; they’re 
leaving us.” 

Caspey led them on into the woods. They walked 
now in a dry sibilance of leaves and crackling under- 
growth. Trees loomed into the lantern light; above 
them, among the thinning branches, stars swam in the 
hushed, vague sky. The dogs were on ahead, and they 
went on among the looming tree trunks, sliding down 
into ditches where sand gleamed in the lantern’s pool 
and where the scissoring shadow of Caspey’s legs was 
enormous, struggled through snatching briers and up 
the other bank. 

“We better head away fum de creek bottom,” Caspey 
suggested. “Dey mought strike a ’coon, and den dey 
won’t git home ’fo’ day.” He bore away toward the 
open again ; they emerged from the woods and crossed 
a field of sedge, odorous of sun and dust, in which the 
lantern was lightly nimbused. “H’mawn, dawg.” 

They entered the woods again. Narcissa was begin- 
ning to tire, but Bayard strode on with a fine oblivious- 
ness of that possibility, and she followed without com- 
plaint. At last, from some distance away, came that 
single ringing cry. Caspey stopped. “Le’s see which 
way he gwine.” They stood in the darkness, in the sad, 
faintly chiU decline of the year, among the dying tr^s, 
listening. “Whooy,” Caspey shouted mellowly. ‘Oro 


git ’im.” • 1 1 

The dog replied, and they moved again, slowly, 

pausing at intervab to listen again. The hound bay^; 

there were two voices now, and they seemed to be moving 





in a circle across their path. “Whooy,” Caspey called, 
liis voice ebbing in falling echoes among the trees. They 
went on. Again the dogs gave tongue, half the circle 
away from where the first cry had come. “He ca’yin* 
’um right back whar he come fura,” Caspey said. “We 
better wait twell dey gits ’im straightened out.” He set 
the lantern down and squatted beside it, and Isom 
sloughed his burden and squatted also, and Bayard sat 
against a tree trunk and drew Narcissa down beside 
him. The dogs bayed again, nearer. Caspey stared off 
into the darkness toward the sound. 

“I believe hit’s a ’coon dey got,” Isom said. 

“Mought be. Hill ’coon.” 

“Headin’ fer dat holler tree, ain’t he?” 

“Soun’ like it.” They listened, motionless. “We have 
a job, den,” Caspey added. “Whooy.” There was a 
faint chill in the air now, as the day’s sunlight cooled 
from the ground, and Narcissa moved closer to Bayard. 
He took a packet of cigarettes from his jacket and gave 
Caspey one and lit one for himself. Isom squatted on 
his h«ls, his eyes rolling whitely in the lantern light. 

“Gimme one, please, suh,” he said. 

‘W^ou ain’t got no business smokin’, boy,” Caspey 
told him. But Bayard gave him one, and he squatted 
leanly on his haunches, holding the white tube in his 
black diffident hand. There was a scurrying noise in 
the leaves behind them and a tense whimpering, and 
the young dog came into the light and slid with squeak- 
ing whimpers, and the diffident, fleeting phosphorus of 
its eyes against Caspey’s leg. “Whut you want?” 
Caspey said, dropping his hand on its head. “Somethin’ 
skeer you out dar?” The puppy genuflected its gawky 
young body and nuzzled whimpering at Caspey’s hand. 

«87 



“He mus’ ’a’ foun’ a bear down ^"onder,” Caspey said. 
“Wouldn’t dem other dawgs he’p you ketch ’im?” 

“Poor little fellow,” Narcissa said. “Did he really 
get scared, Caspey.^ Come here, puppy.” 

“De other dawgs jes’ went off and lef’ ’im,” Caspey 
answered. The puppy moiled diffidently about Caspey’s 
knees; then it scrambled up and licked his face. 

“Git down fum here!” Caspey exclaimed, and he 
flung the puppy away. It flopped awkwardly in the 
dry leaves and scrambled to its feet, and at that moment 
the hounds bayed again, mellow and chiming and 
timbrous in the darkness, and the puppy whirled and 
sped yapping shrilly toward the sound. The dogs bayed 
again ; Isom and Caspey listened. “Yes, sub,” Caspey 
repeated, “he headin’ fer dat down tree.” 

“You know this country like you do the back yard. 


don’t you, Caspey?” Narcissa said. 

“Yessum, I ought to. I been over it a hund’ed times 
since I wuz bawn. Mist’ Bayard knows hit, too. He 
been huntin’ it long ez I is, pretty near. Him and Mist 
Johnny bofe. Miss Jenny send me wid ’um when dey 
had dey fust gun; me and dat ’ere single bar’l gun I 
use ter have ter tie together wid a string. You ’member 
dat ole single bar’l, Mist’ Bayard? But hit would shoot. 
Alany’s de fox squir’l we shot in dese woods. Rabbis, 
too.” Bayard was leaning back against the tree. He 
was gazing off into the tree tops and the soft sky be- 
yond, his cigarette burning slowly in his hand, fehe 
looked at his bleak profile against the lantern glow and 
moved closer against him. But he did not respond, and 
she slid her hand in his. But it too was eold, and ag«_m 
he had left her for the lonely heights of his despair. 

Caspey was speaking again, in his slow, consonant^ 
voice with its overtones of mellow sadness. JVlist 


S88 



Johnny, now, he sho’ could shoot. You ’member dat 
time me and you and him wuz ” 

Bayard rose. He dropped his cigarette and crushed 
it carefully with his heel. “Let’s go,” he said. “They 
ain’t going to tree.” He drew Narcissa to her feet and 
turned and went on. Caspey got up and unslung his 
horn and put it to his lips. The sound swelled about 
them, grave and clear and prolonged; then it died into 
echoes and so into silence again, leaving no ripple in the 
still darkness. 

It was near midnight when they left Caspey and 
Isom at their cabin and followed the lane toward the 
house. The barn loomed presently beside them, and 
the house among its thinning trees, against the hazy 
sky. He opened the gate and she passed through and 
he followed and closed it, and turning he found her 
beside him, and stopped. “Bayard?” she whispered, 
leaning against him, and he put his arms around her 
and stood so, gazing above her head into the sky. She 
took his face between her palms and drew it down, but 
his lips were cold and upon them she tasted fatality and 
doom, and she clung to him for a time, her head bowed 
against his chest. 

After that she would not go with him again. So he 
went alone, returning anywhere between midnight and 
dawn, ripping his clothing off quietly in the darkness 
and sliding cautiously into bed. But when he was still 
she would touch him and speak his name in the dark 
beside him, and turn to him W'arm and soft with sleep. 
And they would lie so, holding to one another in the 
darkness and the temporary abeyance of his despair 
and the isolation of that doom he could not escape. 


289 



‘‘Well,” Miss Jenny said briskly, above the soup, 
“your girl’s gone and left you, and now you can find 
time to come out and see your kinfolks, can’t you?” 

Horace grinned a little. “To tell the truth, I came 
out to get something to eat. I don’t think that one 
woman in ten has any aptitude for housekeeping, but 
my place is certainly not in the home.” 

“You mean,” Miss Jenny corrected, “that not one 
man in ten has sense enough to marry a decent cook.” 

“Maybe they have more sense and consideration for 
others than to spoil decent cooks,” he suggested. 

“Yes,” young Bayard said, “even a cook’ll quit work 
when she gets married.” 

“Dat’s de troof,” Simon, propped in a slightly florid 
attitude against the sideboard, in a collarless boiled 
shirt and his Sunday pants (it is Thanksgiving Day) 
and reeking a little of whisky in addition to his normal 
odors, agreed. “I had to fin’ Euphrony fo’ new cookin 
places de fust two mont’ we wuz ma’ied.” 

Dr. Peabody said, “Simon must have married some- 
body else’s cook.” 

“I’d rather marry somebody else’s cook than some- 
body else’s wife,” Miss Jenny snapped. 

“Miss Jenny!” Narcissa reproved. ‘‘You hush.’ ^ 

“I’m sorry,” Miss Jenny said immediately. “I wosn t 
saying that at you, Horace; it just popped into my 
head. I was talking to you, Loosh Peabody. You think, 
just because you’ve eaten off of us Thanksgiving and 
Christmas for sixty years, that you can come into my 

own house and laugh at me, don’t you? 

“Hush, Miss Jenny!” Narcissa repeated. Horace put 

S90 



down his spoon, and Narcissa’s hand found his beneath 
the table. 

“What*8 that?” Old Bayard, his napkin tucked into 
his waistcoat, lowered his spoon and cupped his hand to 
his ear. 

“Nothing,” young Bayard told him. “Aunt Jenny 
and Doc hghting again. Come alive, Simon.” Simon 
stirred and removed the soup plates, but laggardly, still 
giving his interested attention to the altercation. 

^‘Yes,” Miss Jenny rushed on, “just because that old 
fool of a Will Falls put axle grease on a little bump 
on his face without killing him, you have to go around 
swelled up like a poisoned dog. What did you have to 
do with it? You certainly didn’t take it ofif. Maybe 
you conjured it on his face to begin with?” 

“Haven’t you got a piece of bread or something Miss 
Jenny can put in her mouth, Simon?” Dr. Peabody 
asked mildly. Miss Jenny glared at him a moment; 
then she flopped back in her chair. 

“You, Simon! Are you dead?” Simon removed the 
plates and bore them out, and the guests sat avoiding 
one another’s eyes a little while Miss Jenny, behind her 
barricade of cups and urns and jugs and things, con- 
tinued to breathe fire and brimstone. 

“Will Falls,” old Bayard repeated. “Jenny, tell 
Simon, when he fixes that basket, to come to my ofiice; 
I’ve got something to go in it.” This was the pint flask 
of whisky which he included in old man Falls’ Thanks- 
giving and Christmas basket and which the old fellow 
divided oiit by spoonfuls as far as it would go among 
his ancient and homeless cronies on those days; and 
invariably old Bayard reminded her to tell Simon of 
something which neither of them had overlooked. 

«91 



“All right,” she returned. Simon reappeared, with a 
huge silver coffee-urn, set it beside Miss Jenny, and 
retreated to the kitchen. 

“How many of you want coffee now.^” she asked 
generally. “Bayard will no more sit down to a meal 
without his coffee than he’d fly. Will you, Horace?” 
He declined, and without looking at Dr. Peabody 
she said, “I reckon you’ll have to have some, won’t 
you?” 

“If it’s no trouble,” he answered mildly. He winked 
at Narcissa and assumed an expression of lugubrious 
diffidence. Miss Jenny drew two cups, and Simon ap- 
peared with a huge platter borne gallantly and pre- 
cariously aloft and set it before old Bayard with a 
magnificent flourish. 

“My God, Simon,” young Bayard said, “where did 
vou get a, whale this time of year?” 

“Dat’s a fish in dis worl’, mon,” Simon agreed. And 
it was a fish. It was a yard long and broad as a saddle 
blanket; it was a jolly red color and it lay gaping on 
the platter with an air of dashing and rollicking 

joviality. ^ t_v .. 

“Dammit, Jenny,” old Bayard said pettishly, ‘Svhat 

did you want to have this thing for? Who wanU to 
clutter his stomach up with fish in November, with a 
kitchen full of ’possum and turkey and squirrel?” 

“There are other people to eat here besides you, 
she retorted. “If you don’t want any, don’t eat it. We 
always had a fish course at home,” she added. “But you 
can’t wean these Mississippi country folks away from 
bread and meat to save your life. Here, Simon.” Simon 
set a stack of plates before old Bayard and he now 
came with his tray and Miss Jenny put two coffee cups 
on it and he served them to old Bayard and Dr. Tea- 

292 



body. Miss Jenny drew a cup for herself, and Simon 
passed sugar and cream. Old Bayard, still grumbling 
heavily, carved the fish. 

“I ain’t ever found anything wrong with fish at any 
time of year,” Dr. Peabody said. 

“You wouldn’t,” Miss Jenny snapped. Again lie 
winked heavily at Narcissa. 

“Only,” he continued, “I like to catch my own, out 
of my own pond. Mine have mo’ food value.” 

“Still got your pond. Doc?” j'oung Bayard asked. 

“Yes. But the fisliin’ ain’t been so good, this year. 
Abe had the flu last winter, and ever since he’s been 
goin’ to sleep on me, and I have to sit there and wait 
until he wakes up to take the fish off and bait the hook 
again. But finally I thought about tyin’ a cord to his 
leg and the other end of it to the bench, and now w’lien 
I get a bite, I just reach around and give the string 
a yank and wake ’im up. You’ll have to bring yo^ wife 
out some day, Bayard. She ain’t never seen my pond.” 

“You haven’t?” Bayard asked Narcissa. She had 
not. “He’s got benches all around it, with footrests, 
and a railing just high enough to prop your pole on, 
and a nigger to every fisherman to bait his hook and 
take the fish off. I don’t see why you feed all those 
niggers, Doo.” 

“Well, I’ve had ’em around so long I don’t know 
how to get shut of ’em, ’less I drown ’em. Feedin’ ’em 
is the main trouble, though. Takes everything I can 
make. If it wasn’t for them, I’d ’a’ quit practicin’ long 
ago. That’s the reason I dine out whenever I can : every 
time I get a free meal, it’s the same as a half holiday to 
a workin’ man.” 

“How many have you got, Doctor?” Narcissa asked. 

I don’t rightly know,” he answered. “I got six or 

K* 293 


seven registered ones, but I don’t know how many 
scrubs I have. I see a new yeariin’ every day or so.” 
Simon was watching him with rapt interest. 

“You ain’t got no extry room out dar, is you, Doc- 
tuh.^” he asked. “Here I slaves all de livelong day, 
keepin’ ’um in vittles en sech.” 

“Can you eat cold fish and greens every day,^” Dr. 
Peabody asked him solemnly. 

“Well, suh,” Simon answered doubtfully, “I ain’t 
so sho’ erbout dat. I burnt out on fish once, when I wuz 
a young man, en I ain’t had no right stomach fer it 
since.” 

“Well, that’s all we have to eat, cut home.” 

“All right, Simon,” Miss Jenny said. Simon was 
propped statically against the sideboard, watching Dr. 
Peabody with musing astonishment. 

“En you keeps yo’ size on cole fish en greens.^ Grentle- 
mun, I’d be a bone-rack on dem kine o’ vittles in two 
weeks, I sholy would.” 

“Simon!” Miss Jenny raised her voice sharply. 
“Why won’t you let him alone, Loosh, so he can ’tend 
to his business.^” Simon came abruptly untranced and 
removed the fish. Beneath the table Narcissa slipped 

her hand in Horace’s again. 

“Lay off of Doc, Aunt Jenny,” young Bayard said. 
He touched his grandfather’s arm. “Can’t you make 
her let Doc alone?” 

“What’s he doing, Jenny?” old Bayard asked. 

“Won’t he eat his dinner?” 

“None of us’ll get anything to eat if he sits there 

and talks to Simon about cold fish and turnip greens,” 
Miss Jenny replied. 

“I think you’re mean, to treat him bke you do, Miss 
Jenny,” Narcissa said. 


S94 



“Well, it gives me something to be thankful for,” 
Dr. Peabody answered, “that you never took me when 
you had the chance. I went and proposed to Jenny 
once,” he told them. 

“You old gray-headed liar,” Miss Jenny said, “you 
never did any such a thing!” 

“Oh, yes, I did. Only I did it on John Sartoris’ 
account. He said he was havin’ mo’ trouble than he 
could stand with politics outside his home. And, do 
you know ” 

“lK5osh Peabody, you’re the biggest liar in the 
world !” 

“ 1 pretty near had her persuaded for a while 

It was that first spring them weeds she brought out 
here from Ca’lina bloomed, and there was a moon and 
we were in the garden and there was a mockin*- 
bird ” 

“No such thing!” Miss Jenny shouted. “There 
never was ” 

“Look at her face, if you believe I’m lyin’,” Dr. 
Peabody said. 

“Look at her face,” young Bayard echoed rudely. 
“She’s blushing!” 

And she was blushing, but her cheeks were like 
banners, and her head was still high amid the gibing 
laughter. Narcissa rose and came to her and laid her 
arm about her trim erect shoulders. “You all hush this 
minute, she said. “You’d better consider yourselves 
lucky that any of us ever marry you, and flattered even 
when we refuse.” 

“I am flattered,” Dr. Peabody rejoined, “or I 
wouldn’t be a widower now.” 

“Who wouldn’t be a widower, the size of a hogshead 
and living on cold fish and turnip greens,?” Miss Jenny 

^95 



said. “Sit down, honey. I ain’t scared of any man 
alive.” 

Narcissa resumed her seat, and Simon appeared 
again, with Isom in procession now, and for the next 
few minutes they moved steadily between kitchen and 
dining-room with a roast turkey and a smoked ham and 
a dish of quail and another of squirrels, and a baked 
’possum in a bed of sweet potatoes, and squash and 
pickled beets, and sweet potatoes and Irish potatoes, 
and rice and hominy, and hot biscuit and beaten biscuit 
and delicate long sticks of cornbread, and strawberry 
and pear preserves, and quince and apple jelly, and 
stewed cranberries and pickled peaches. 

Then tliey ceased talking for a while and really ate, 
glancing now and then across the table at one another 
in a rosy glow of amicability and steamy odors. From 
time to time Isom entered with hot bread, while Simon 
stood overlooking the field somewhat as Caesar must 
have stood looking down into Gaul, once it was well in 
hand, or the Lord God Himself when He contemplated 
his latest chemical experiment and saw tliat it was good. 

“After this, Simon,” Dr. Peabody said, and he sighed 
a little, “I reckon I can take you on and find you a 
little side meat now and then.” 

“I ’speck you kin,” Simon agreed, watching them 
like an eagle-eyed general who rushes reserves to the 
threatened points, pressing more food upon them as 
they faltered. But even Dr. Peabody allowed himself 
vanquished after a time, and then Simon brought m 
l)ics of three kinds, and a small, deadly plum pudding, 
and a cake baked cunningly with whisky and nuts and 
fruits and ravishing as odors of heaven and treacherous 
and fatal as sin ; and at last, with an air sibylline and 

296 



solemnly profound, a bottle of port. The sun lay hazily 
in the glowing west, falling levelly through the win- 
dows and on the silver arrayed on the sideboard, dream- 
ing in mellow gleams among its placid rotundities and 
on the colored panes in the fanlight high in the western 
wall. 

But that w’as November, the season of hazy, lan- 
guorous days, when the first flush of autumn is over and 
winter beneath the sere horizon breathes yet a spell — 
November, when like a shawled matron among her chil- 
dren, the year dies peacefully, without pain and of no 
disease. Early in December the rains set in and the year 
turned gray beneath the season of dissolution and of 
death. All night long and all day it wlnspered on the 
roof and along the eaves. The trees shed their final 
stubborn leaves in it and gestured their black and 
sorrowful branches against ceaseless vistas; only a lone 
hickory at the foot of the park kept its leaves, gleaming 
like a sodden flame on the eternal azure, and beyond 
the valley the hills were hidden by a sw'addling of rain. 

Almost daily, despite Miss Jenny’s strictures and 
commands and the grave protest in Narcissa’s eyes, 
Bayard went forth with a shotgun and the two dogs, 
to return just before dark, wet to the skin. And cold; 
his lips would be chill on hers and liis eves bleak 
and haunted, and in the j’ellow firelight of their room 
she w*ould cling to him, or lie crying quietly in the 
darkness beside his rigid body, with a ghost between 
them. 

“Look here,” Miss Jenny said, coming on her as she 
sat brooding before the fire in old Bayard’s den, “you 
spend too much time this way; you’re getting moony. 

297 


Stop worrying about him ; he*s spent half his life soak- 
ing wet, yet neither one of ’em ever had a cold even, 
that I can remember.” 

“Hasn’t he?” she answered listlessly. Miss Jenny 
stood beside her chair, watching her keenly. Then she 
laid her hand on Narcissa’s head, quite gently for a 
Sartoris. 

“Are you worrying because maybe he don’t love you 
like you think he ought to?” 

“It isn’t that,” she answered. “He doesn’t love any- 
body. He won’t even love the baby. He doesn’t seem to 
be glad, or sorry, or anything.” 

“No,” Miss Jenny agreed. The fire crackled and 
leaped among the resinous logs. Beyond the gray win- 
dow the day dissolved endlessly. “Listen,” Miss Jenny 
said abruptly. “Don’t you ride in that car with him 
any more. You hear?” 

“No. It won’t make him drive slowly. Nothing will.” 

“Of course not. Nobody believes it will, not even his 
grandfather. He goes along for the same reason that 
boy himself does. Sartoris. It’s in the blood. Savages, 
every one of ’em. No earthly use to anybody.” To- 
gether they gazed into the leaping flames. Miss Jenny’s 
hand still lying on Narcissa’s head. “I’m sorry I got 
you into this.” 

“You didn’t do it. Nobody got me into it. I did it 
myself.” 

“H’m,” Miss Jenny said. And then : “Would you do 
it over again?” The other did not reply, and she re- 
peated the question. “Would you?” 

“Yes,” Narcissa answered. “Don’t you know I 
would?” Again there was silence between them, in which 
without words they sealed their hopeless pact with that 
fine and passive courage of women. Narcissa rose. 

298 



“I believe I’ll go in and spend the day with Horace^ 
if you don’t mind,” she said. 

“All right,” Miss Jenny agreed. “I believe I would, 
too. Horace probably needs a little looking after, by 
now. He looked sort of gaunt when he was out here last 
week. Like he wasn’t getting proper food.” 

When she entered the kitchen door Hunice, the cook, 
turned from the bread board and lifted her hands in a 
soft, dark gesture. “Well, Miss Narcy,” she said, “we 
ain’t seed you in a mont’. Is you come all de way in 
de rain?” 

“I came in the carriage. It was too wet for the car.” 
She came into the room. £unice watched her with grave 
pleasure., “How are you all getting along?” 

“He gits enough to eat,” Eunice answered; “I sees 
to dat. But I has to make him eat it. He needs you back 
here.” 

“I’m here, for the day, anyhow. What have you got 
for dinner.^” Together they lifted lids and peered into 
the simmering vessels on the stove and in the oven. 
“Oh, chocolate pie!” 

“I has to toll ’im wid dat,” Eunice explained. “He’ll 
eat anything, ef I jes’ makes ’im a chocolate pie,” she 
added proudly. 

“I bet he does,” Narcissa agreed. “Nobody can make 
chocolate pies like yours.” 

“Dis one ain’t tumt out so well,” Eunice said, 
deprecatory. “I ain’t so pleased wid it.” 

“Why, Eunice! It’s perfect,” 

“No’m, it ain’t up to de mark,” Eunice insisted. But 
she beamed, gravely diffident, and for a few minutes the 
two of them talked amicably while Narcissa pried into 
cupboards and boxes. 


S99 


Then she returned to the house and mounted to her 
room. The dressing-table was bare of its intimate silver 
and crystal, and the drawers were empty, and the entire 
room, with its air of still and fading desolation, re- 
proached her. Chill too; there had been no fire in the 
grate since last spring, and on the table beside the bed, 
forgotten and withered and dead, was a small bunch 
of flowers in a blue vase. Touching them, they crumbled 
in her fingers, leaving a stain, and the water in the 
vase smelled of rank decay. She opened the window and 
threw them out. 

The room was too chill to stop in long, and she de- 
cided to ask Eunice to build a fire on the hearth for 
the comfort of that part of her which still lingered here, 
soberly and a little sorrowful in the chill and reproach- 
ful desolation. At her chest of drawers she paused again 
and remembered those letters, fretfully and with a little 
musing alarm, deprecating anew her carelessness in not 
destroying them. But maybe she had, and so she entered 
again into the closed circle of her bewilderment and 
first fear, trying to remember what she had done with 
tlicm. But she was certain that she had left them ^*'^**® 
drawer with her under things, positive that she had 
put them there. Yet she had never been able to find 
them, nor liad Eunice nor Horace seen them. The day 
she had missed them was the day before her wedding, 
when slie had packed her things. That day she had 
missed them, finding in their stead one m a differen 
handwriting, which she did not remember having re- 
ceived. The gist of it was plain enough, although she 
had not understood some of it literally. But on ™t day 
she had read it with tranquil detachment: it and all it 
brought to mind was definitely behind her now. An 
lacking even this, she would not have been shocked 

soo 



she had compreliended it. Curious a little, perhaps, at 
some of tlie words, but that is all. 

But w'hat she had done with those other letters she 
could not remember, and not bein^ able to gave licr 
moments of definite fear when she considered the possi' 
bility that people might learn that some one had had 
such thoughts about her and put them into words. 
Well, they were gone ; there was nothing to do save hope 
that she had destroyed them as she had tlie last one, 
or if she had not, to trust that they would never be 
found. Yet that brought back the original distaste and 
dread; the possibility that the intactness of her deep 
and heretofore inviolate serenity might be tlie sport 
of circumstance; that she must trust to chance against 
the eventuality of a stranger casually picking a stray 
bit of paper from the ground. . , . 

But she would put this firmly aside, for the time 
being, at least. This should be Horace’s day, and her 
own too — a surcease from that ghost-ridden dream to 
which she clung, waking. She descended the stairs. 
There was a fire in the living-room. It had burned down 
to embers, however, and she put coal on it and punched 
it to a blaze. That w*ould be the first thing he’d see 
when he entered; perhaps he’d wonder, perhaps he’d 
know before he entered, having sensed her presence. 
She considered telephoning him, and she mused in- 
decisively for a moment before the fire, then decided to 
let it be a surprise. But supposing he didn’t come home 
to dinner because of the rain. She considered this, and 
pictured him W'alking along a street in the rain, and 
immediately and with instinctive foreknowledge, she 
went to the closet beneath the stairs and opened the 
door. It was as she had known; his overcoat and his 
raincoat both hun^-'there, and the chances were he 

SOI 


didn’t even have an umbrella; and again irritation and 
exasperation and untroubled affection welled within her 
and it was as it had been of old again, and all that had 
since come between them rolled away like clouds. 

Heretofore her piano had always been rolled into the 
living-room when cold weather came. But now it stood 
yet in the smaller alcove. There was a fireplace here, 
but no fire had been lighted yet, and the room was 
chilly. Beneath her hands the cold keys gave forth a 
sluggish chord, accusing, reproving too, and she re- 
turned to the fire and stood where she could see, through 
the window, the drive beneath its somber, dripping 
cedars. The small clock on the mantel behind her chimed 
twelve, and she went to the window and stood vnth her 
nose touching the chill glass and her breath frosting 
it over. Soon, now: he was erratic in his hours, but 
never tardy, and every time an umbrella came into 
sight her heart leaped a little. But it was not he, and 
she followed the bearer’s plodding passage until he 
shifted the umbrella enough for her to recognize him, 
and so she did not see Horace until he was halfway 
up the drive. His hat was turned down about his face 
and his coat collar was hunched to his ears, and as 
she had known, he didn’t even have an umbrella. 

“Oh, you idiot,” she said and ran to the door and 
through the curtained glass she saw his shadowy shape 
come leaping up the steps. He flung the door open and 
entered, whipping his sodden hat against his 
so did hot see her until she stepped forth. “You idiot, 

she said, “where’s your raincoat?” ^ 

For a moment he stared at her with his wild ana 
diffident unrepose ; then he said “Narcy !” and his face 

lighted and he swept her into his wet arms. 

“Don’t,” she cried. “You’re wet!” But he swung her 

302 



from the floor, against his sopping chest, repeating 
“Narcy, Narcy”; then his cold nose was against her 
face and she t^ted rain. 

“Narcy,” he said again, hugging her, and she ceased 
resisting and clung to him. Then abruptly he released 
her and jerked his head up and stared at her with sober 
intensity. “Narcy,” he said, still staring at her, “has 
that surly blackguard ” 

“No, of course not,” she answered sharply. “Have 
you gone crazy?” Then she clung to him again, wet 
clothes and all, as though she would never let him go. 
“Oh, Horry,” she said, “I’ve been a beast to you !” 

S 

This time it was a Ford car, and Bayard saw its wild 
skid as the driver tried to jerk it across the treacherous, 
thawing road, and in the flashing moment and with 
swift amusement, he saw, between the driver’s cravatless 
collar and the woman’s stocking bound around his head 
beneath his hat and tied under his chin, his Adam’s 
apple like a scared puppy in a tow sack. This flashed 
on and behind, and Bayard wrenched the wheel. The 
sailed Ford swam sickeningly into view again as the 
big car slewed on the greasy surface, its declutched 
engine roaring. Then the Ford swam from sight again 
M he wrenched the wheel over and slammed the clutch 
in for more stability ; and once more that sickening, 
unhurried rush as the car refused to regain its feet and 
frosty December world swept laterally across his 
vision. Old Bayard lurched against him; from the cor- 
ner of his eye he could see the old fellow’s hand clutch- 
ing the top of the door. Now they were facing the 
bluff on which the cemetery lay; directly above them 

303 


John Sartoris’ effigy lifted its florid stone gesture and 
from amid motionless cedai*s gazed out on the valley 
where for two miles the railroad he had built ran be- 
neath his carven eyes. Bayard wrenched the wheel once 


more. 

On the other side of the road a precipice dropped 
sheer away, among scrub cedars and corroded ridges 
skeletoned brittlely with frost and muddy ice where the 
sun had not yet reached. The rear end of the car hung 
timelessly over this before it swung again, with the 
power full on, swung on until its nose pointed down- 
hill again, with never a slackening of its speed. But 
still it would not come into the ruts, and it had lost the 
crown of the road, and although they had almost 
readied the foot of the hill, Bayard saw that they would 
not make it. Just before they slipped off he wrenched 
the stcoring-wliccl over and swung the nose straight 
over tlie bank, and tlie car poised lazily for a moment, 
as tliough taking breath. “Hang on,” he shouted to his 

grandfather; then they plunged. 

An interval utterly witliout sound, in which all sen- 
sation of motion was lost. Then scrub cedar burst 
crackling about them and whipping branches of it ex 
ploded on the radiator and slapped viciously at them as 
they leaned with braced feet, and the car slewed m a 
long bounce. Another vacuumlike in‘-7\then a sUo k 

it in liis tight hands, wrenching 

out his Lm just in time to keep the other 
ing through the windshield. “Hang ^ ^ 

Tlie car had never faltered and he dragge le ^ 

wheel over and swung it down the ravme and opened 
tllrengine, and with fhe engine and the momentum of 

304 



the plunge, they rocked and crashed on down the ditch 
and turned and heaved up tlic now shallow bank and 
on to the road again. Bayard brought it to a stop. 

He sat motionless for a moment. “Whew,” he said. 
And then, “Great God in the mountain.” His grand- 
father sat motionless beside him, his hand still clutch- 
ing the door and his head bent a little. “Think I’ll have 
a cigarette after that,” Bayard added. He dug one 
from his pocket, and a match; his hands w'ere shaking. 
“I thought of that damn concrete bridge again, just 
as we went over,” he explained, apologetically. He took 
a deep draught at his cigarette and glanced at his 
grandfather. “Y’all right?” Old Bayard made no reply, 
and with his cigarette poised Bayard looked at him. 
He sat as before, his head bent a little and his hand on 
the door. “Grandfather?” Bayard said sharply. Still 
old Bayard didn’t move, even when his grandson flung 
the cigarette away and shook him roughly. 

Up the last hill the tireless pony bore him and in the 
low December sun their shadow fell long across the 
ridge and into the valley beyond, from which tlio high 
shrill yapping of the dogs came on the frosty, w’indless 
air. Young dogs, Bayard told himself, and he sat his 
horse in the faint scar of the road, listening as the high- 
pitched hysteria of them swept echoing across his aural 
field. Motionless, he could feel frost in the air. Above 
him the pines, though there was no wind in them, made 
a continuous dry, wild sound, as though the frost in 
the air had found voice; above them, against the high 
evening blue, a shallow V of geese slid. “There’ll bo ice 
tonight,” he thought, watching them and thinking of 

305 


black backwaters where they would come to rest, of 
rank bayonets of dead grass about which water would 
shrink soon in fixed glassy ripples in the brittle dark- 
ness. Behind him the earth rolled away ridge on ridge 
blue as wood-smoke, on into a sky like thin congealed 
blood. He turned in his saddle and stared unwinking 
into the sun that spread like a crimson egg broken on 
the ultimate hills. That meant weather ; he snuffed the 
still, tingling air, hoping he smelled snow. 

The pony snorted and tossed his head experimentally 
and found the reins slack and lowered his nose and 


snorted again into the dead leaves and delicate sere 
needles of pine beneath his feet. “Come up, Perry,’* 
Bayard said, jerking the reins. Perry raised his head 
and broke into a stiff, jolting trot, but Bayard lifted 
him smartly out of it and into his steady fox trot again. 

He had not gone far when the dogs broke again into 
clamorous uproar to his left and suddenly near, and as 
he reined Perry back and peered ahead along the fading 
scar of the road, he saw the fox trotting sedately toward 
him in the middle of it. Perry saw it at the same time 
and laid his fine ears back and rolled his young eyes. 
But the animal came on unawares at its steady, un- 
hurried trot, glancing back over its shoulder from tinie 
to time. “Well, I’ll be damned,” Bayard whispered, 
holding Perry rigid between his knees. The fox w^ not 
forty yards away; still it came on, seemingly utterly 
unaware of the horseman. Then Bayard shouted. 

The ahimal glanced at him ; the level sun swam ^dly 

and fleetingly in its eyes; then ^th » 

flash of brown it was gone. Bayard exj^Ued^s breath . 

his heart was thumping against his ribs. Whjmy, h 
veiled. “Come on, dogs!” The din of them swe led to a 
shrill pandemonium and the pack boiled into the road 

306 



in a chaos of spotted hides and flapping tongues and 
ears. None of them was more than half grown, and 
ignoring the horse and rider they surged still clamoring 
into the undergrowth where the fox had vanished and 
shrieked frantically on; and as Bayard stood in his 
stirrups and gazed after them, preceded by yapping 
in a still higher and more frantic key, two even smaller 
puppies swarmed out of the woods and galloped past 
him on their short legs, with whimpering cries and 
expressions of ludicrous and mad concern. Then the 
clamor died into hysterical echoes and so away. 

He rode on. On either hand was a ridge: the one 
darkling like a bronze bastion, on the other the final 
rays of the sun lying redly. The air crackled and 
tingled in his nostrils and seared his lungs with exhila- 
rating needles. The road followed the valley. But half 
the sun now showed above the western wall, and among 
intermittent trees he rode stirrup-deep in shadow like 
cold water. He would just about reach the house before 
dark, and he shook Perry up a little. The clamor of 
the dogs swelled again ahead of him, approaching the 
road, and he lifted Perry into a canter. 

Presently before him lay a glade — an old field, sage- 
grown, its plow scars long healed over. The sun filled it 
with dying gold and he pulled Perry short upstanding; 
there, at the corner of the field beside the road, sat the 
fox. It sat there on its haunches like a dog, watching 
the trees across the glade, and Bayard sent Perry for- 
ward again. The fox turned its head and looked at him 
with a covert, fleeting glance, but without alarm, and 
Bayard halted Perry in intense astonishment. The 
clamor of the dogs swept nearer through the woods; 
yet the fox sat on its haunches, watching the man 
with covert stolen glances, paying the dogs no heed. 

307 



It revealed no alarm whatever, not even when tlie pup- 
pies burst yapping madly into the glade. They moiled 
at the wood’s edge for a time while the fox divided its 
attention between them and the man. 


At last the largest puppy, evidently the leader, saw 
the quarry. Immediately they stopped their noise and 
trotted across the glade and squatted in a circle facing 
the fox, their tongues lolling. Then with one accord 
they turned about and faced the darkening woods, 
from which, and nearer and nearer, came that spent, 
frantic yapping in a higher key. The largest dog 
barked once; the yapping among the trees swelled with 
frantic relief and the two smaller puppies appeared 
and burrowed like moles through the sedge and came 
up. Then the fox rose and cast another quick, furtive 
glance at the horseman, and surrounded by the ami- 
cable weary calico of the puppies, trotted up the road 
and vanished among the trees. “Well, I’ll be damned, 
Bayard said, gazing after them. “Come up. Perry.’ 

At last a pale and windless plume of smoke stood 
above the trees ahead, and he emerged from the woods 
and in tlie rambling wall of the house a window glowed 
with ruddy invitation across the twilight. Dogs had 
already set up a resonant, bell-like uproar; above it 
Bavard could distinguish the clear tenor of puppies 
and a voice shouting at them, and as he halted Perry 
in the yard, tlic fox was vanishing diffidently but with- 
out liaste beneath the house. A lean figure faced him in 
the dusk, witli an ax in one hand and an armful ot 


wood, and Bayard said: ^ 

“What the devil’s tliat thing. Buddy? That 
“That’s Kllen,” Buddy answered. He put tlie wood 
down deliberately, and the ax, and ho came and shook 


.308 



Bayard’s hand once limply, in the country fashion, but 
his hand was hard and firm. “How you?” 

“All right,” Bayard answered. “I came out to get 
that old fox Rafe was telling me about.” 

“Sure,” Buddy agreed in his slow, infrequent voice. 
“We been expectin’ you. Git down and lemme take yo’ 
pony.” 

“No, I’ll do it. You take the wood on in; I’ll put 
Perry up.” But Buddy was firm, without insistence or 
rudeness, and Bayard surrendered the horse to him. 

“Henry,” Buddy shouted at the house, “Henry.” A 
door opened on jolly leaping flames; a figure stood 
squatly in it. “Here’s Bayard,” he said. “Go on in and 
warm,” he added, leading Perry away. Hogs sur- 
rounded Bayard; he picked up the wood and the ax and 
went on toward the house in a ghostly, spotted surge of 
dogs, and the figure stood in the lighted doorway while 
he mounted the veranda and leaned the ax against the 
wall. 

“How you?” Henry said, and again the handshake 
was limp, again the hand firm and kind ; flabbier though 
than Buddy’s hard young flcsli. He relieved Bay- 
ard of the wood and they entered the house. The walls 
of the room were of chinked logs. On them hung two or 
three outdated calendars and a patent medicine litho- 
graph in colors. The floor was bare, of hand-trimmed 
boards scuffed with heavy boots and polished by the 
pads of generations of dogs; two men could lie side by 
side in the fireplace. In it now four-foot logs blazed 
against the clay fireback, swirling in wild plumes into 
the chimney’s dark maw, and in silhouette against it, 
his head haloed by the shaggy silver disorder of his 
hair, Virginius AfacCallum sat. “Hyer’s Bayard Sar- 
toris, pappy,” Henry said. 

309 



The old man turned in his chair with grave, leonine 
deliberation and extended his hand without rising. In 
1861 he was sixteen and he had walked to Lexington, 
Virginia, and enlisted, served four years in the Stone- 
wall brigade and walked back to Mississippi and built 
himself a house and got married. His wife’s dot was a 
clock and a dressed hog; his own father gave them a 
mule. His wife was dead these many years, and her 
successor was dead, but he sat now before the fireplace 
at which that hog had been cooked, beneath the roof 
he had built in ’66, and on the mantel above him the 
clock sat, deriding that time whose servant it once 
had been. “Well, boy?” he said. “You took yo’ time 
about cornin’. How’s yo’ folks?” 

“Pretty well, sir,” Bayard answered. He looked at 
the old man’s hale, ruddy face intently and sharply. 

No, they hadn’t heard yet. 

“We been expectin’ you ever since Rafe seen you in 
town last spring. Henry, tell Mandy to set another 

plate.” 

Four dogs had followed him into the room. Three 
of them watched him gravely with glowing eyes ; the 
Other one, a blue-ticked hound with an expression of 
majestic gravity, came and touched its cold nose to his 
hand. “Hi, Gen’ral,” he said, rubbing its ears, where- 
upon the other dogs approached and thrust their noses 

against his hands. . , j 

“Pull up a cheer,” Mr. MacCallum said. He squared 

his own chair around and Bayard obeyed. The. dogs 
followed him, surging with blundering decorum about 
his knees. “I keep sendin’ word in to git yo’ granpappy 
out hyer,” the old man continued, “but he’s too ’tarnal 
proud, or too damn lazy to come. Hyer, Gen’ral! Git 

310 



away from thar. Kick ’em away, Bayard. Henry !” he 
shouted. Henry appeared. “Drive these damn dogs out 
of hyer till after supper.” 

Henry drove the dogs from the room. Mr. Mac- 
Callum picked up a long sliver of pine from the hearth 
and fired it and lit his pipe, and smothered the sliver in 
the ashes and laid it on the hearth again. ^^Rafe and 
Lee air in town today,” he said. “You could have come 
out with them in a waggin. But I reckon you’d ruther 
have yo’ own hoss.” 

“Yes, sir,” he answered quietly. Then they would 
know. He stared into the fire for a time, rubbing his 
hands slowly on his knees, and for an instant he saw the 
recent months of his life coldly in all tlieir headlong and 
heedless wastefulness; saw its entirety like the swift 
unrolling of a film, culminating in that which he had 
been warned against and that any fool might have 
forseen. Well, damn it, suppose it had : was he to blame 
Had he insisted that his grandfather ride with him? 
Had he given the old fellow a bum heart? and then, 
coldly : Y on 'were afraid to go home. Y on made a nigger 
sneak your horse out to you. YoUy who deliberately do 
things your judgment tells you may not he successful^ 
even possible^ are afraid to face the consequences of 
your own acts. Then again something bitter and deep 
and sleepless in him blazed out in vindication and 
justification and accusation ; what, he knew not, blazing 
out at what, Whom, he did not know: You did it! You 
caused it aU; you lulled Johnny. 

Henry had drawn a chair up to the fire, and after a 
while the old man tapped his clay pipe carefully out 
against his palm and drew a huge, turnip-shaped silver 
watch from his corduroy vest. “Half after five,” he 
said. “Ain’t them boys got in yet?” 

311 


“They’re here,” Henry answered briefly. “Heard ’em 
takin’ out when I put out the dawgs.” 

“Git the jug, then,” his father ordered. Henry rose 
and departed again, and presently feet clumped heavily 
on the porch and Bayard turned in his chair and stared 
bleakly at the door. It opened and Rafe and Lee 
entered. 

“Well, well,” Rafe said, and his lean, dark face 
lighted a little. “Got here at last, did you?” He shook 
Bayard’s hand, and Lee followed Iiim. Lee’s face, like 
all of them, was a dark, saturnine mask. He was not so 
stocky as Rafe, and least talkative of them all. His 
eyes were black and restless ; behind them lurked some- 
thing wild and sad. He shook Bayard’s hand without a 

word. 

But Bayard was watching Rafe. There was nothing 
in Rafe’s face; no coldness, no questioning. Was it 
possible that he could have been to town, yet not heard? 
Or had Bayard himself dreamed it? But he remembered 
that unmistakable feel of his grandfather when he had 
touched him ; remembered how he had slumped sud- 
denly as though the very fiber of him, knit so erect and 
firm for so long by ])ride and the perverse necessity of 
his family doom, had given way all at once, letting his 
skeleton rest at last. Mr. MacCallum^spoke. 

“Did you git to the express office?” 

“We never got to town,” Rafe answered. “Axle 
tree broke just this side of Vernon. Had to uncouple 
the wagon and drive to Vernon and get it patched up. 
Too late to go in, then. We got our supplies there and 

come on home.” 

“Well, hit don’t matter. You’ll be goin’ in next week, 
for Christmas,” the old man said. Bayard drew a long 
breath and lit a cigarette, and on a draft of vivid dark- 

312 



ness Buddy entered and came and squatted Icanly in 
the shadowy chimney corner. 

“Got that fox you were telling me about hid out 
yet?*’ Bayard asked Rafe. 

“Sure. And we’ll get him, this time. Maybe tomor- 
row. Weather’s changin’.” 

“Snow?” 

“Might be. ^^at’s it goln’ to do tonight, pappy ?” 

“Rain,” the old man answered. “Tomorrow, too. 
Scent won’t lay good till We’n’sday. Henry!” After a 
moment he shouted “Henry” again, and Henry en- 
tered with a blackened kettle trailing a faint plume of 
vapor and a stoneware jug and a thick tumbler with 
a metal spoon in it. There was something domestic, 
womanish, about Henry, with his squat, slightly tubby 
figure and his mild brown eyes and his capable, unhur- 
ried hands. He it was who superintended the kitchen 
(he was a better cook now than Mandy) and the house, 
where he could be found most of the time, pottering 
soberly at some endless task. He visited town almost as 
infrequently as his father; he cared little for hunting, 
and his sole relaxation w'as making whisky, good 
whisky and for family consumption alone, in a secret 
fastness known only to his father and the negro who 
assisted him, after a recipe handed down from lost 
generations of his usquebaugh-bred forbears. He set 
the kettle and the jug and the tumbler on the heartli 
and took the clay pipe from his father’s hand and put 
it on the mantel and reached down a cracked cup of 
sugar and seven tumblers, each with a spoon in it. The 
old man leaned forward into the firelight and made the 
toddies one by one, with tedious and solemn delibera- 
tion. ^Vlien he had made one around, there were two 
glasses left. “Ain’t them other boys come in yet?” he 

813 



asked. Nobody answered, and he corked the jug. Henry 
set the two glasses back on the mantel. 

Mandy came to the door presently, filling it with her 
homely calico expanse. “Y’all kin come on in now,” she 
said, and as she turned, waddling, Bayard spoke to her 
and she stopped as the men rose and trooped from the 
room. The old man was straight as an Indian, and with 
the exception of Buddy’s lean and fluid length, he 
towered above his sons by a head. Mandy waited beside 
the door and gave Bayard her hand. “You ain’t been 
out in a long while, now,” she said. “And I bet you ain’t 


fergot Mandy, neither.” 

“Sure I haven’t,” Bayard answered. But he had. 
Money, to Mandy, did not compensate for some trinket 
of no value which John never forgot to bring her when 
he came. He followed the others into the frosty dark- 
ness. Beneath his feet the ground was already stiffen- 
ing; overliead the sky was brilliant with stars. He 
stumbled a little behind the crowding backs until Rafe 
opened a door into a separate building and stood aside 
until they had entered. This room was filled 
warmth and a thin blue haze pungent with cooking 
odors, in which a kerosene lamp burned steadily on 
a long table. At one end of the table was a single chair; 
the other three sides were paralleled by backless wooden 
benches. Against the further wall was the stove, and a 
huge cupboard of split planks, and a wood-box. Behind 
the stove two negro men and a half-grown boy sat, their 

faces shining with heat and their "J'f “'K 
whitelv ; about their feet five puppies snarled with mock 
ravageness at one another or chewed damp y at the 
negroes’ motionless ankles or pro^led about beneath 
thf stove and the adjacent floor with blundering, aim 


less inquisitiveness. 


314 ) 



“Howdy, boj's,” Bayard said, calling them by name, 
and they bobbed their heads at him with diffident flashes 
of teeth and polite murmurs. 

“Put dem puppies up, Richud,” Mandy ordered. 
The negroes gathered the puppies up one by one and 
tumbled them into a smaller box behind the stove, wliere 
they continued to move about with sundry scratchings 
and bumpings and an occasional smothered protest. 
From time to time during the meal a head would 
appear, staring above the rim of the box with blinking 
and solemn curiosity, then vanish with an abrupt scuf- 
fling thump and more protests, and the moiling, infant- 
like noises rose again. “Hush up, dawgs ! G’wan to 
sleep, now,” Richard would sa^, rapping on the box 
with his knuckles. After a w'hile the noises ceased. 

The old man took the lone chair, his sons around 
him and the guest; some coatless, all collarless, with 
their dark, saturnine faces all stamped clearly from 
the same die. They ate — sausage and spare ribs, and a 
dish of hominy and one of fried sweet potatoes, and 
corn bread and a molasses jug of sorglium, and IVIandy 
poured coffee from a huge enamelware pot. In the mid- 
dle of the meal the two missing ones came in — Jackson, 
the eldest, a man of fifty-two, with a broad, high fore- 
head and thick brows and an expression at once dreamy 
and intense — a sort of shy and impractical Cincin- 
natus; and Stuart, forty-four and Rafe’s twin. 
Although they were twins, there was no closer resem- 
blance between them than between any two of the 
others, as though the die were too certain and made 
too clean an imprint to be either hurried or altered, 
even by nature. Stuart had none of Rafe’s easy manner 
(Rafe was the only one of them that, by any stretch of 
the imagination, could have been called loquacious) ; 

315 



on the other hand, he had much of Henry’s placidity. | 
He was a good farmer and a canny trader, and he had ’ 
a respectable bank account of his own. Henry, fifty, 
was the second son. 

They ate with silent and steady decorum, with only 
the barest essential words, but amicably. Mandy moved 
back and forth between table and stove. 

Before they had finished a sudden bell-like uproar 
of dogs floated up from the night and seeped through 
the tight walls into the room. “Dar, now.” The negro i 
Richard cocked his head. Buddy poised his coffee cup. 
“Wliere arc they, Dick?” 

“Right back of de spring-house. Dey got ’im, too.” 
Buddy rose and slid leanly from his comer. 

“I’ll go with you,” Bayard said, rising also. The 
others ate steadily. Richard got a lantern down from 
the top of tlie cupboard and lit it, and the three of them 
passed out of the room and into the chill darkness, 
across which the baying of the dogs came in musical 
gusts, ringing as frosty glass. It was chill and dark. 
The house loomed, its rambling low wall broken only 
by the ruddy glow of the window. “Ground’s about 

hard already,” Bayard remarked. 

“ ’Twon’t freeze tonight,” Buddy answered. “Will 

it, Dick?” 

“Naw, suh. Gwine rain.” 

“Go on,” Bayard said. “I don’t believe it.” 

“Pappy said so.” Buddy replied. “Warmer’n ’twas 

at sundown.” , . . i mu 

“Don’t feel like it, to me,” Bayard insisted. They 

passed the wagon, motionless in the starlight, its tires 
glinting like satin ribbons; and the long rambling 
stable, from which placid munchings came and an occa- 
sional snuffing snort as the lantern passed. Then the 

316 


lantern twinkled among tree trunks as the path de- 
scended. The clamor of the dogs swelled just beneath 
them and the ghostly shapes of them shifted in the 
faint glow, and in a sapling just behind the spring- 
house they found the ’possum curled motionless and 
with its eyes tigiitly shut, in a fork not six feet from 
the ground. Buddy lifted it down by the tail, unresist- 
ing. “Hell,” Bayard said. 

Buddy called the dogs away, and they mounted the 
path again. In a disused shed behind the kitchen what 
seemed like at least fifty eyes gleamed in matched red 
points as Buddy swung the lantern in and flashed it on 
to a cage screened with chicken wire, from which rose 
a rank, warm odor and in which grizzled, furry bodies 
moved sluggishly or swung sharp, skull-like faces into 
the light. He opened the door and dumped his latest 
captive in among its fellows and gave the lantern to 
Richard. They emerged. Already the sky was hazed 
over a little, losing some of its brittle scintillation. 

The others sat in a semicircle before the blazing fire; 
at the old man’s feet the blue-ticked hound dozed. They 
made room for Bayard, and Buddy squatted again in 
the chimney corner. 

“Git ’im.?” Mr. MacCallum asked. 

“Yes, sir,” Bayard answered. “Like lifting your hat 
off a nail in the wall.” 

The old man puffed at his pipe. “We’ll give you a 
sho’ ’nough hunt befo’ you eave.” 

Rafe said, “How many you got now. Buddy.?” 

“Ain’t got but fo’teen,” Buddy answered. 

“Fo’teen?” Henry repeated. “We won’t never eat 
fo’teen ’possums.” 

Turn ’em loose and run ’em again, then,” Buddy 
answered. The old man puffed slowly at his pipe. The 

S17 


L 



others smoked or chewed also, and Bayard produced i 
his cigarettes and offered them to Buddy. Buddy shook 
his head. 

“Buddy ain’t never started yet,” Rafe said. 

“You haven’t.?” Bayard asked. “What’s the matter, 
Buddy?” 

“Don’t know,” Buddy answered, from his shadow. 
“Just ain’t had time to learn, I reckon.” 

The fire crackled and swirled; from time to time 
Stuart, nearest the wood-box, put another log on. The 
dog at the old man’s feet dreamed, snuffed; soft ashes ; 
swirled on the hearth at its nose and it sneezed, waking 
itself, and raised its head and blinked up at the old 
man’s face, then dozed again. They sat without words 
and with very little movement, their grave, aquiline 
faces as though carved by the firelight out of the 
shadowy darkness, shaped by a single thought and 
smoothed and colored by the same hand. The old man 
tapped his pipe out carefully on his palm and consulted 

his fat silver watch. Eight o’clock. 

“We ’uns gits up at fo’ o’clock, Bayard,” he said- 
“But you don’t have to git up till daylight Henry, git 

the jug.” 


“Four o’clock,” Bayard repeated, as he and Buddy 
undressed in the lamplit chill of the loan-to room in 
which, in a huge wooden bed with a faded Patchwork 
quilt, Buddy slept. “I don’t see why you bother to go 
to bed at all.’’ As he spoke his breath vaporized in the 

'^*”“yTs'^’’ Buddy agreed, ripping his shirt over his head 
and kicking his lean, race-horse shanks out of his 
shabby khaki pants. “Don’t take long ^ s^nd the 
night at our house. You’re comp’ny, though, he added, 

318 


and in his voice was just a trace of envy and of longing. 
Never again after twenty-five will sleep in the morning 
be so golden. His preparations for slumber w’ere simple ; 
he removed his boots and pants and shirt and went to 
bed in his woolen underw'ear, and he now lay with only 
his round head in view, watching Bayard, who stood 
in a sleeveless jersey and short thin trunks. “You ain’t 
goin’ to sleep warm that-a-way,” Buddy said. “You 
W’ant one o’ my heavy ’uns.?” 

“I’ll sleep warm, I guess,” Bayard answered. He 
blew the lamp out and groped his way to the bed, his 
toes curling away from the icy floor, and got in. The 
mattress was filled with corn shucks : it rattled beneath 
him, drily sibilant, and whenever he or Buddy moved 
at all or took a deep breath even, the shucks shifted 
w’ith small ticking sounds. 

“Git that ’ere qiiilt tucked in good over there,” 
Buddy advised from the darkness, expelling his breath 
in a short explosive sound of relaxation. He yawned, 
audible but invisible. “Ain’t seen you in a long" while,” 
he suggested. 

“That’s right. Let’s see, when was it? Two — three 
years, isn’t it?” 

“Nineteen fifteen,” Buddy answered, “last time you 
and him , , .” Then he added quietly: “I seen in a 
paj^r when it happened. The name. Kind of knowed 
right oflP ^twas him. It was a limey paper/^ 

“You did? Where were you?” 

“Up there,” Buddy answered, “w'here them limeys 

was. Where they sent us. Flat country. Don’t sec how 

they ever git it drained enough to make a crop, with 
all that rain.” 

Bayard’s nose was like a lump of ice. He 
could feel his breath warming his nose a little, could 

319 



almost see the pale smoke of it as he breathed; could j 
feel the inhalation chilling his nostrils again. It seemed 
to him that he could feel the planks of the ceiling as i 
they sloped down to the low wall on Buddy’s side, could I 
feel the atmosphere packed into the low corner, bitter 
and chill and thick, too thick for breathing, like invis- 
ible slush, and he lay beneath it. . . . He was aware 
of the dry ticking of shucks beneath him and discov- 
ered, so, that he was breathing in deep, troubled drafts 
and he wished dreadfully to be up, moving, before a 
fire, light ; anywhere, anywhere. Buddy lay beside him 
in the oppressive, half-congealed solidity of the chill, ^ 
talking in his slow, inarticulate idiom of the war. It { 
was a vague, dreamy sort of tale, without beginning or 
end and filled with stumbling references to places i 
wretcliedly mispronounced — you got an impression of 
people, creatures without initiative or background or 
future, caught timelessly in a maze of solitary conflict- 
ing preoccupations, like bumping tops, against an 
imminent but incomprehensible nightmare. 

“How’d you like the army. Buddy?” Bayard asked. 

“Not much,” Buddy answered. “Ain’t enough to do. 

Good life for a lazy man.” He mused a 

gimme a cliarm,” he added, in a burst of shy, diffident 

confidence and sober pleasure. 

“A charm,?” Bayard repeated. 

“Uhuh. One of them brass gimcracks on to a colored 
ribbon. I aimed to show it to you, but I fergot Ho it 
tomorrow. That ’ere flo’s too dang cold to tech till^l 
have to. I’ll watch a chance tomorrow when pappy s 

outen the house.” . 

“Whv? Don’t he know you got it? 

“He knows,” Buddy answered. “Only he don t like | 
it because he claims it’s a Yankee charm. Rafe says 

320 


I 


pappy and Stonewall Jackson ain’t never surrendered.” 

“Yes,” Bayard repeated. Buddy ceased talking and 
presently he sighed again, emptying his body for sleep. 
But Bayard lay rigidly on his back, his eyes wide open. 
It was like being drunk; whenever you close your eyes, 
the room starts going round and round, and so you 
lie rigid in the dark with your eyes wide open, not to 
get sick. Buddy had ceased talking and his breathing 
had become longer, steady and regular. The shucks 
shifted with sibilant complaint as Bayard turned slowly 
on to his side. 

Buddy breathed on in the darkness, steadily and 
peacefully. Bayard could hear his own breathing also, 
but above it, all around it, enclosing him, that other 
breathing. As though he were one thing breathing witli 
restrained, laboring pants, within himself breatliing 
with Buddy’s breathing; using up all the air so that 
the lesser thing must pant for it. Meanwhile tl»e greater 
thing breathed deeply and steadily and unawares, 
asleep, remote; ay, perimps dead. Perhaps he was dead, 
and he recalled that morning, relived it with strained 
attention from the time he had seen the first tracer- 
smoke until, from his steep bank, he watched the flame 
burst like the gay flapping of an orange pennon from 
the nose of John’s Camel and saw his brother’s familiar 
^sture and the sudden awkward sprawl of his plung- 
ing body as it lost equilibrium in midair; relived it 
again as you might run over a printed, oft-read tale, 
trying to remember, feel, a bullet going into his own 
body or head that might have slain him at the same 
instant. That would account for it, would explain so 
much; that he too was dead and this was hell, through 
wluch he moved for ever and ever with an illusion of 
quickness, seeking his brother who in turn 

321 


was some- 



where seeking him, never the two to meet. He turned 
on to his back again ; the shucks whispered beneath him 
with dry derision. 

The house was full of noises ; to his sharpened senses 
the silence was myriad: the dry agony of wood in the 
black frost; the ticking of shucks as he breathed; the 
very atmosphere itself like slush ice in the vise of the 
cold, oppressing his lungs. His feet were cold, his limbs 
sweated with it, and about his hot heart his body was 
rigid and shivering, and he raised his naked arms above 
the covers and lay for a time with the cold like a leaden 
cast on them. And all the while Buddy’s steady breath- 
ing and his own restrained and panting breath, both 
sourceless yet involved one with the other. 

Beneath the covers again his arms were cold across 
his chest and his hands were like ice on his ribs, and he 
moved with infinite caution while the chill encroached 
from his shoulders downward and the hidden shucks 
chattered at him, and swung his legs to the floor. He 
knew where the door was and he groped his way to it 
on curling toes. It was fastened by a wooden bar, 
smooth as ice, and fumbling at it he touched something 
else beside it, something chill and tubular and upright, 
and his hand slid down it and then he stood for a 
moment in the icy pitch darkness with the shotgun in 
his hands, and as he stood so, his numb finprs fum- 
bling at the breech, he remembered the box of shells on 
the wobden box on which the lamp sat. A moment longer 
he stood so, his head bent a little and the gun in his 
numb hands ; then he leaned it again in the comer and 
lifted the wooden bar from its slots carefully and with- 
out noise. The door sagged from the hinges, 
the first jarring scrape, he grasped the edge of it and 

lifted it back, and stood in the door. 

322 



In the sky no star showed, and the sky was the sag- 
ging corpse of itself. It lay on the earth like a deflated 
balloon ; into itf»the dark shape of the kitchen rose with- 
out depth, and tlie trees beyond, and homely shapes 
like sad ghosts in the chill corpse-light — the wood-pile; 
a, farming-tool; a barrel beside the broken stoop at the 
kitchen door where he had stumbled, supperward. The 
gray cliill seeped into him like water into sand, with 
short trickling runs; halting, groping about an ob- 
struction, then on again, trickling at last along his 
unimpeded bones. He was shaking slowdy and steadily 
with cold ; beneath his hands his flesh was rougli and 
W'ithout sensation; yet still it jerked and jerked as 
though something within the dead envelope of him 
strove to free itself. Above his head, on the plank roof, 
there sounded a single light tap, and as though at a 
signal the gray silence began to dissolve. He shut the 
door silently and returned to bed. 

In the bed he lay shaking more than ever, to the cold 
derision of the shucks beneath him, and he lay quietly 
on his back, hearing the winter rain W'hispering on the 
roof. There was no drumming, as when summer rain 
falls through the buoyant air, but a whisper of un- 
emphatic sound, as though the atmosphere lying 
hea>'ily on the roof dissolved tliere and dripped slug- 
gishly and steadily from the eaves. His blood ran again, 
and the covers felt like iron or like ice; while he lay 
motionless beneath the rain his blood warmed yet more, 
until at last his body ceased trembling and he lay pres- 
ently in something like a tortured and fitful doze, sur- 
rounded by coiling images and shapes of stubborn 
despair and the ceaseless striving for , , . not vindi- 
cation so much as comprehension; a hand, no matter 
whose, to touch him out of his black chaos. He would 

323 


spurn it, of course, but it would restore his cold 
sufficiency again. 

The rain dripped on, dripped and dripped; beside 
him Buddy breathed placidly and steadily: he had not 
even changed his position. At times Baj'ard dozed fit- 
fully: dozing, he was wide awake; waking, he lay in a 
hazy state filled with improbable moiling, in which there 
was neither relief nor rest : drop by drop the rain wore 
the night away, wore time away. But it was so long, 
so damn long. His spent blood, wearied with struggling, 
moved through his body in slow beats, like the rain, 
wearing his flesh away. It comes to all ... Bible . . . 
some preacher, anyway. Maybe he knew. Sleep, It 
comes to all. 

At last, through the walls, he heard movement. It 
was indistinguishable; yet he knew it was of human 
origin, made by people whose names and faces he knew, 
waking again into the world he had not been able even 
temporarily to lose; people to whom he was . . . and 
he was comforted. The sounds continued; unmistakably 
he heard a door, and a voice which, with a slight effort 
of concentration, he knew he could name; and best of 
all, knew that now he could rise and go where they 
were gathered about a crackling fire, where light was, 
and warmth. And he lay, at ease at last, intending to 
rise and go to them the next moment, putting if ^ 
little longer while his blood beat slowly t^'i-ough his 
body and his heart was quieted. Buddy breathed 
steadily beside him, and his own breath was untroubled 
now os Buddy’s while the human sounds came mur- 

murously into the cold room with grave 
reassurance. It comes to all, it comes to all, his tired 

heart comforted him, and at last he slept, 

324 



He waked m the gray morning, his body weary and 
heavy and dull; his sleep had not rested him. Buddy 
was gone, and it still rained, though now it was a defi- 
nite, purposeful sound on the roof and the air was 
w’armer, wdth a rawness that probed to the very bones 
of him; and in his stockings and carrying his boots in 
his hand, he crossed the cold room where Lee and Rafe 
and Stuart slept, and found Rafe and Jackson before 
the living-room fire. 

‘‘We let you sleep,” Rafe said; then he said, “Good 
Lord, boy, you look like a ha’nt. Didn’t you sleep last 
night.'”’ 

“Yes, I slept all right,” Bayard answered. He sat 
down and stamped into his boots and buckled the 
thongs below his knees. Jackson sat at one side of the 
heartli. In the shadowy corner near his feet a number 
of small, living creatures moiled silently, and still bent 
over his boots, Bayard said : 

“What you got there, Jackson? What sort of pup- 
pies are them?” 

“New breed I’m tryin’,” Jackson answered. Rafe 
returned with a half a tumbler of Henry’s pale amber 
whisky. 

“Them’s Ellen’s pups,” he said. “Git Jackson to tell 
you about ’em after you eat. Here, drink this. You 
look all wore out. Buddy must ’a’ kept you awake 
talkin’,” he added with dry irony. 

Bayard drank the whisky and lit a cigarette. 
Mandy’s got yo’ breakfast on the stove,” Rafe said. 

“EUen?” Bayard repeated. “Oh, that fox. I aimed 
to ask about her, last night. Y’all raise her?” 

^ “Yes. She growed up with last year’s batch of pup- 
pies. Buddy caught her. And now Jackson aims to 

«• 325 



revolutionize the huntin’ business with her. Aims to 
raise a breed of animals with a hound’s wind and bottom 
and a fox’s smartness and speed.” 

Bayard approached the corner and examined the 
small creatures w’ith interest and curiosity. “I never 
saw many fox pups,” he said at last, “but I never saw 
anything that looked like them.” 

“That’s w’hat Gen’ral seems to think,” Rafe an- 
sw'ered. 

Jackson spat into the fire and stooped over the 
creatures. They knew his hands, and the moiling of 
them became more intense, and Bayard then noticed 
that they made no sound at all, not even pupp}' whim- 
perings. “Hit’s a experiment,” Jackson explained. 
“The boys makes fun of ’em, but they hain’t no more’n 
weaned, yit. You wait and see.” 

“Don’t know what you’ll do with ’em,” Rafe said 
brutally. “They won’t be big enough for work stock. 
Better go git yo’ breakfast, Bayard.” 

“You wait and see,” Jackson repeated. He touched 
the scramble of small bodies with his hands in a gentle, 
protective gesture. “You can’t tell nothin’ ’bout a dawg 
’twell hit’s at least two months old, can you.?” he ap- 
pealed to Bayard, looking up at him with his vague, 
intense gaze from beneath his shaggy brows, 

“Go git yo’ breakfast, Bayard,” Rafe insisted. 

“Buddy’s done gone and left you.’ 

He bathed his face with icy water in a tin pan on 
the porch, and ate his breakfast — ham and eggs and 
flapjacks and sorghum— while Mandy talked to him 
about his brother. When he returned to the house old 
Mr. MacCallum was there. The puppies moiled inex- 
tricably in their corner, and the old man sat with his 
hands on his knees, watching them with bluff and ribald 

326 



enjoyment, while Jackson sat near by in a sort of 
hovering concern, like a hen. 

“Come hyer, boy,” the old man ordered wlien Bayard 
appeared. “Hyer, Rafe, git me that ’ere bait line.” 
Rafe went out, returning presently with a bit of pork 
rind on the end of a string. The old man took it and 
hauled the puppies ungently into the liglit, where they 
crouched abjectly — as strange a litter as Ba3'ard had 
ever seen. No two of them looked alike, and none of 
them looked like any other living creature — neither fox 
nor hound, partaking of both, yet neither; and despite 
their soft infancy there was about them something 
monstrous and contradictory and obscene, here a fox’s 
keen, cruel muzzle between the melting, sad eyes of a 
hound and its mild ears, there limp ears tried valiantly 
to stand erect and failed ignobly in flapping points; 
and limp, brief tails brushed over w’ith a faint golden 
fuzz like the insides of chestnut burrs. As regards color, 
they ranged from reddish brown through an indiscrim- 
inate brindle to pure ticked beneath a faint dun cast, 
and one of them had, feature for feature, old General’s 
face in comical miniature, even to his expression of sad 
and dignified disillusion, “Watch ’em, now',” the old 
man directed. 

He got them all facing forward ; then he dangled the 
meat directly behind them. Not one became aware of 
its presence; he swept it back and forth just above their 
heads; not one looked up. Then he swung it directl}' 
before their eyes; still they crouched diffidently on their 
young, unstead}' legs and gazed at the meat w'ith curi- 
osity but without any personal interest w’hatcver, and 
fell again to moiling soundlessly among themselves. 

“You can’t tell nothin’ about dawgs ” Jackson 

began. His father interrupted him. 

327 


“Now, watch.” He held the puppies with one hand 
and with the other he forced the meat into their mouths. 
Immediately they surged clumsily and eagerly over his 
hand, but he moved the meat away and at the length of 
the string he dragged it along the floor just ahead of 
them until they had attained a sort of scrambling lope. 
Then in midfloor he flicked the meat slightly aside, but 
without swerving the puppies blundered on and into a 
shadowy corner, where the wall stopped them and from 
which there rose presently the patient, voiceless con- 
fusion of them. Jackson crossed the floor and picked 
them up and brought them back to the fire. 

“Now, what do you think of them, fer a pack of 
huntin’ dawgs?” the old man demanded. “Can’t smell, 
can’t bark, and damn ef I believe they kin see.” 

“You can’t tell nothin’ about a dawg ” Jackson 

essayed patiently. 

“Gen’ral kin,” his father interrupted. “Hyer, Rafe, 
call Gen’ral in hyer.” 

Rafe went to the door and called, and presently 
General entered, his claws hissing a little on the bare 
floor and his ticked coat beaded with rain, and he stood 
and looked into the old man’s face with grave inquiry. 
“Come hyer,” Mr. MacCallum said, and the dog moved 
again, with slow dignity. At that moment he saw the 
puppies beneath Jackson’s chair. He paused in mid 
stride and for a moment he stood looking at them with 
fascination and bafflement and a sort of grave horror; 
then he gave his master one hurt, reproachful look and 
turned and departed, his tail between his legs. Mr. 
MacCallum sat down and rumbled heavily within him- 
self. 

“You can’t tell about dawgs ” Jackson repeated. 

He stooped and gathered up his charges, and rose. 

328 


Mr» MacCallum continued to rumble and shake. 
“Well, I don’t blame the old feller,” he said. “Ef I had 
to look around on a passcl of chaps like them and say 

to myself, ‘Them’s my boys’ ” But Jackson was 

gone. The old man sat and rumbled again, with heavy 
enjoyment. “Yes, suh, I reckon I’d feel ’bout as proud 
as Gen’ral does. Rafe, han’ me down my pipe.” 

All that day it rained, and the following day and the 
one after that. The dogs lurked about the house all 
morning, underfoot, or made brief excursions into the 
weather, returning to sprawl before the fire drowsing 
and malodorous and steaming until Henry came along 
and drove them out; twice from the door Bayard saw 
the fox, Ellen, fading with brisk diffidence across the 
yard. Witli tlie exception of Henry and Jackson, who 
had a touch of rheumatism, the others were somewhere 
out in the rain most of the day. But at mealtime they 
gathered again, shucking their wet outer garments on 
the porch and stamping in to thrust their muddy, smok- 
ing boots to the fire while Henry fetched the kettle and 
the jug. And last of all. Buddy, soaking wet. 

Buddy had a way of getting his lean length up from 
his niche beside the chimney at any hour of the day 
and departing without a word, to return in ivfo hours 
or six or twelve or forty-eight, during w'hich periods 
and despite the presence of Jackson and Henry and 
usually Lee, the place had a vague air of desertion, 
until Bayard realized that the majority of the dogs 
were absent also. Hunting, they told him, when Buddy 
had been missing since breakfast. 

“Why didn’t he let me know?” Bayard demanded. 

“Maybe he thought you wouldn’t keer to be out in 
the weather,” Jackson suggested. 

329 


Buddy don’t mind weather,” Henry explained. 
“One day’s like another to him.” 

“Nothin’ ain’t anything to Buddy,” Lee said, in his 
bitter, passionate voice. He sat brooding over the fire, 
hjs womanish hands moving restlessly on his knees. 

He’d spend his whole life in that ’ere river bottom, 
with a hunk of cold cawn bread to eat and a passel of 
dawgs fer comp’ny.” He rose abruptly and quitted the 
room. Lee was in the late thirties. As a child he had 
been sickly. He had a good tenor voice and was much 
in demand at Sunday singings. He was supposed to be 
keeping company with a young woman living in the 
hamlet of Mount Vernon, six miles away. He spent 
much of his time tramping moodily and alone about the 
countryside. 

Henry spat into the fire and jerked his head after 
the departing brother. “He been to Vernon lately?” 

“Him and Bafe was there two days ago,” Jackson 
answered. 

Bayard said: “Well, I won’t melt. I wonder if I 
could catch up with him now?” 

They pondered for a while, spitting gravely into the 
fire. “I misdoubt it,” Jackson said at last. “Buddy’s 
liable to be ten mile away by now. You ketch ’im next 
time befo’ he starts out.” 

After that Bayard did so, and he and Buddy tried 
for .birds in the skeletoned fields in the rain in which 
the guns made a flat, mournful sound that lingered in 
the streaming air like a spreading stain, or tried the 
stagnant backwaters along the river channel for duck 
and geese; or, accompanied now and then by Rafe, 
hunted ’coon and wildcat in the bottom. At times and 
far away, they would hear the shrill yapping of the 
young dogs in mad career. “There goes Ellen,” Buddy 

330 


would remark. Then toward the end of the week the 
weather cleared, and in a twilight imminent with frost 
and while the scent lay well on the wet earth, old Gen- 
eral started the red fox that had baffled him so many 
times. 

All through the night the ringing, bell-likc tones 
quavered and swelled and echoed among tlie lulls, and 
all of them save Henry followed on horseback, guided 
by the cries of the hounds but mostly by the old man’s 
and Buddy’s uncanny and seemingly clairvoyant skill 
in anticipating the course of the race. Occasionally 
they stopped while Buddy and his father wrangled 
about where the quarry would head next, but usually 
they agreed, apparently anticipating the animal’s 
movements before it knew them itself ; and once and 
again they halted their mounts on a bill and sat in the 
frosty starlight until th& dogs’ voices welled out of the 
darkness mournful and chiming, swelled louder and 
nearer and swept invisibly past, not half a mile away; 
faded diminishing and with a falling suspense, as of 
bells, into the silence again. 

“Thar, now!” the old man exclaimed, shapeless in his 
overcoat, on his white horse. “Ain’t that music fer a 
man, now?” 

“I hope they git ’im this time,” Jackson said. “Hit 
hurts Gen’ral’s conceit so much ever* time he fools *im.” 


“They won’t git ’im,” Buddy said, 
tired, he’ll hole up in them rocks.” 


“Soon’s he gits 


“I reckon we’ll have to wait till them pups of Jack- 
son’s gits big enough,” the old man agreed, “unless 
they’ll refuse to run they own granddaddy. They done 
refused ever’thing else except vittles.” 

“You jest wait,” Jackson repeated, indefatigable. 
“When them puppies gits old enough to—” 


831 


“Listen.” 

The talking ceased. Again across the night the dogs' 
voices rang among the hills, long, ringing cries fading, 
falling with a quavering suspense, like touched bells or 
strings, repeated and sustained; by bell-like echoes 
repeated and dying among the dark hills beneath the 
stars, lingering yet in the ears crystal-clear, mournful 
and valiant and a little sad. 

“Too bad Johnny ain’t here,” Stuart said quietly. 
“He’d enjoy this race.” 

“He was a feller fer huntin’, now,” Jackson agreed. 
“He’d keep up with Buddy, even.” 

“John was a fine boy,” the old man said. 

“Yes, suh,” Jackson repeated, “a right warm- 
hearted boy. Henry says he never come out hyer with- 
outen he brung Mandy and the boys a little sto’-bought 
somethin’.” 

“He never sulled on a hunt,” Stuart said, “No mat- 
ter how cold and wet it was, even when he was a little 
chap, with that ’ere single bar’l he bought with his own 
money, that kicked ’im so hard ever’ time he shot it. 
And yit he’d tote it around, instead of that ’ere sixteen 
old Colonel give ’im, jest because he saved up his own 
money and bought it hisself.” 

“Yes,” Jackson agreed, “ef a feller gits into some- 
thin’ on his own accord, he’d ought to go through with 
hit cheerful.” 

“He was sho’ a feller fer singin’ and shoutin’,” ^fr. 
MacCallum said. “Skeer all the game in ten mile. I 
mind that night he up and headed off a race down at 
Samson’s bridge, and the next we knowed, here him 
and the fox come afloatin’ down river on that ’ere drift 
lawg, and him singin’ away loud as he could yell.” 

“That ’uz Johnny, all over,” Jackson agreed. “Git- 

S32 



tin’ a whoppin’ big time outen ever’thing that come 
up.” 

“He was a fine boy,” Mr. MacCallum said again. 

“Listen.” 

Again the hounds gave tongue in the darkness below 
them. The sound floated up on tlie chill air, died into 
echoes that repeated tlie sound again until its source 
was lost and the very earth itself might have found 
voice, grave and sad, and wild with all regret. 

Christmas was two days away, and they sat again 
about the fire after supper; again old General dozed at 
his master’s feet. Tomorrow was Christmas Eve and the 
wagon was going into town, and although w’ith that 
grave and unfailing hospitality of theirs, no word had 
been said to Bayard about his departure, he believed 
that in all their minds it was taken for granted that he 
would return home the following day for Christmas; 
and, since he had not mentioned it himself, a little 
curiosity and quiet speculation also. 

It was cold again, with a vivid chill that caused the 
blazing logs to pop and crackle with vicious sparks and 
small embers that leaped out on the floor, to be crushed 
out by a lazy boot, and Bayard sat drowsil}", his tired 
muscles relaxed in cumulate waves of heat as in a warm 
bath and his stubborn, wakeful heart glozed over too, 
for the time being. Time enough tomorrow to decide 
whether to go or not. Perhaps he’d just stay on, with- 
out even offering that explanation which would never 
be demanded of him. Then he realized that Rafe, Lee, 
whoever went, would talk to people, would learn about 
that which he had not the courage to tell them. 

Buddy had come out of his shadowy niche and he 
now squatted in the center of the semicircle, his back 

S3S 


to the fire and his arms around his knees, with his 
motionless and seemingly tireless ability for sitting 
timelessly on his heels. He was the baby, twenty years 
old. His mother had been the old man’s second wife, 
and his hazel eyes and the reddisli thatch cropped close 
to his round head was a noticeable contrast to his 
brothers’ brown eyes and black hair. But the old man 
had stamped Buddy’s face as clearly as any one of the 
other boys’, and despite its youth it too was like the 
others — aquiline and spare, reserved and grave, though 
a trifle ruddy with his fresh coloring and finer skin. 

The others were of medium height or under, ranging 
from Jackson’s faded, vaguely ineffectual lankness, 
through Henry’s placid rotundity and Rafe’s — Raph- 
ael Semmes he was — and Stuart’s poised and stocky 
muscularity, to Lee’s thin and fiery restlessness; but 
Buddy with his saplinglike leanness stood eye to eye 
with that father who w'ore his seventy-seven years as 
though they were a thin coat. “Long, spindlin’ scoun- 
drel,” the old man would say, with bluff derogation. 
“Keeps hissclf w'ore to a shadder totin’ around all that 
grub he eats.” And they would sit in silence, looking at 
Buddy’s jack-knifed length with the same identical 
thought; a thought which each believed' peculiar to 
liimself and which none ever di\Tjlged — that some day 
Buddy would marry and perpetuate the name. 

Buddy also bore his father’s name, though it is 
doubtful if any one outside the family and the War 
Department knew it. He had run away at seventeen 
and enlisted; at the infantry concentration camp in 
Arkansas to wliich he had been sent, a fellow recruit 
called him Virge and Buddy had fought him steadily 
and without anger for seven minutes; at the New Jer- 

3S4> 



sey embarcation depot another man had done the same 
thing, and Buddy had fought him, again steadily and 
thoroughly and without anger. In Europe, still follow- 
ing the deep but uncomplex compulsions of his nature, 
he had contrived, unwittingly perhaj)s, to perpetrate 
something which was later ascertained by Authority to 
have severely annoyed the enemy, for which Buddy had 
received his charm, as he called it. What it was he did, 
he could never be brought to say, and the gaud not only 
failing to placate his father’s anger over the fact that 
a son of his had joined the Federal army, but on the 
contrary adding fuel to it, the bauble languished 
among Buddy’s sparse effects, and his militar3' career 
was never mentioned in the family circle; and now as 
usual Buddy squatted among tliem, his back to the fire 
and his arms around his knees, while they sat about 
the hearth with their bedtime toddies, talking of 
Christmas. 

“Turkey,” the old man was saying, with fine and 
rumbling disgust. “With a pen full of ’possums, and 
a river bottom full of squir’l and ducks, and a smoke- 
house full of hawg meat, j’ou damn bo3's have got to 
go clean to towm and buy a turkey fer Christmas 
dinner.” 

“Christmas ain’t Christmas lessen a feller has a little 
somethin’ different from ever’ da^^,” Jackson pointed 
out mildly. 

“You boys jest wants a excuse to git to town and 
loaf all day and spend money,” the old man retorted. 
‘I’ve seen a sight mo’ Christmases than jmu have, boy, 
and ef hit’s got to be sto’bought, hit ain’t Christmas.” 

“How ’bout town folks?” Rafe asked. “You ain’t 
allowin’ them no Christmas a-tall.” 

‘Don’t deserve none,” the old man snapped, “livin’ 

335 


on a little two-by-fo’ lot, jam right up again’ the next 
feller’s back do’, eatin’ outen tin cans.” 

“ ’Sposin’ they all broke up in town,” Stuart said, 
“and moved out here and took up land; you’d hear 
pappy cussin’ town then. You couldn’t git along with- 
out town to keep folks bottled up in, pappy, and you 
know it.” 

“Buyin’ turkeys,” Mr. MacCallum repeated with 
savage disgust. “Buyin’ ’em. I mind the time when I 
could take a gun and step out that ’ere do’ and git a 
gobbler in tlmtty minutes. And a ven’son ham in a hour 
mo’. Why, you fellers don’t know nothin’ about Christ- 
mas. All you knows is sto’ winders full of cocoanuts 
and Yankee popguns and sich.” 

“Yes, sub,” Rafe said, and he winked at Bayard. 
“That was the biggest mistake the world ever made, 
when Lee surrendered. The country ain’t never got 
over it.” 

The old man snorted. “I be damned ef I ain’t raised 
the damnedest, smartest set of boys in the world. Can’t 
tell ’em nothin’, can’t learn ’em nothin’; can’t even set 
in front of my own fire fer the whole passel of ’em tellin’ 
me how to run the whole damn country. Hyer, you 

boys, git on to bed.” 


Next morning Jackson and Rafe and Stuart and 
Lee left for town at sunup in the wagon. Still none of 
them had made any sign, expressed any curiosity as to 
whether they would find him there when they returned 
that night or whether it would be another three years 
before they saw him again. And Bayard stood on the 
frost-wliitened porch, smoking a cigarette in the chill, 
vivid sunrise, and looked after the wagon with its four 
muffled figures and wondered if it would be three years 

336 



again, or ever. The hounds came and nuzzled about 
him and he dropped his hand among their icy noses 
and the warm flicking of their tongues, gazing at the 
trees from beyond which the dr}" rattling of the wagon 
came unimpeded upon the clear and soundless morning. 

“Ready to go?” Buddy said behind him, and ho 
turned and picked up his shotgun where it leaned 
against the wall. The hounds surged about them with 
eager whimperings and frosty breaths and Buddy led 
them across to their pen and huddled them inside and 
fastened the door on their astonished protests. From 
another kennel he unleashed the young pointer, Dan. 
Behind them the hounds continued to lift their baffled 
and mellow expostulations. 

Until noon they hunted the ragged, fallow fields and 

woods-edges in the warming air. The frost was soon 

gone, and the air warmed to a windless languor, and 

twice in brier thickets they saw redbirds darting like 

arrows of scarlet flame. At last Bavard lifted his eves 

• « 

unwinking into the sun. 

“I’ve got to go back. Buddy,” he said. “I’rn going 
home this afternoon.” 

“All right,” Buddy agreed without protest, and he 
called the dog in. “You come back next month.” 

Mandy got tliem some cold food and they ate, and 
while Buddy was saddling Perry, Bayard went into the 
house, where he found Henry laboriously soling a pair 
of hoots and the old man reading a week-old newspaper 
through steel-bowed spectacles. 

“I reckon yo* folks will be lookin’ fer you,” Mr. 
IVIacCallum agreed, removing his spectacles. “We’ll be 
cx])ectin’ you back next month though, to git that ’ere 
fox. Kf we don’t git ’im soon, Gen’ral won’t be able to 
hold up his haid befo’ them puppies.” 

S3T 


“Yes, sir,” Bayard answered, “I will.” 

“And try to git yo* grandpappy to come out with 
you. He kin lay around hyer and eat his haid off well 
as he kin in town thar.” 

“Yes, sir, I will.” 

Buddy led the pony up, and the old man extended 
his hand without rising. Henry put aside his cobbling 
and followed him on to the porch. “Come out again,” 
he said diffidently, giving Bayard’s hand a single 
pump-handle shake, and from a slobbering inquisitive 
surging of half-grown hounds Buddy reached up his 
hand. 

“Be lookin’ fer you,” he said briefly, and Bayard 
wheeled away, and when he looked back they lifted their 
hands gravely. Then Buddy shouted after him and he 
reined Perry about and returned. Henry had vanished, 
and he reappeared with a weighted tow sack. 

“I nigh fergot it,” he said. “Jug of cawn pappy’s 
sendin’ in to yo’ granddaddy. You won’t git no better’n 
this in Loocyvul ner nowhar else, neither,” he added 
with quiet pride. Bayard thanked him^ and Buddy 
fastened tlie sack to the pommel, where it lay solidly 


against his leg. 

“There. That’ll ride.” 

“Yes, that’ll ride. Much obliged.” 

“So long.” 


Perry moved on, and he looked back. They still stood 
there, quiet and grave and steadfast. Beside the kitchen 
door the fox, Ellen, sat, watching him covertly ; near 
her the half-grown puppies rolled and played in the 
sunlight. The sun was an hour high above the western 
hills ; the road wound on into the trees. He looked back 
again. The house sprawled its rambling length in the 

338 



T 


wintry afternoon, its smoke like a balanced plume on 
the windless sky. The door was empty, and he shook 
Perry into his easy, tireless fox trot, the jug of whisky 
jouncing a little against his knee. 

5 

Where the dim, infrequent road to MacCallum’s left 
the main road, rising, he halted Perry and sat for a 
while in the sunset. Jefferson, 14 miles. Rafe and the 
other boys would not be along for some time yet, what 
with Christmas Eve in town and the slow, festive gath- 
ering of the county. Still, they may have left to«Ti 
early, so as to get home by dark; might not be an hour 
away. The sun’s rays, slanting, released the chill they 
had held prisoned in the ground during the perpendic- 
ular hours and it rose slowly about him as he sat Perry 
in the middle of the road, and slowly his blood cooled 
with the cessation of Perry’s motion. He turned the 
pony’s head away from town and shook him into his fox 
trot again. 

Darkness overtook him soon, but he rode on beneath 
the leafless trees, along the pale road in the gathering 
starlight. Already Perry was thinking of stable and 
supper and he W’ent on with tentative, inquiring toss- 
ings of his head, but obediently and w’ithout slackening 
his gait, knowing not where they were going nor why, 
save that it was away from home, and a little dubious, 
though trustfull}'. The chill grew; in the silence and 
the loneliness and the monotony. Bayard reined Perry 
to a halt and untied the jug and drank, and fastened it 
to the saddle again. 

The hills rose wild and black about them. No sign 
of any habitation, no trace of man’s hand did they 

339 


encounter. On all sides the hills rolled blackly away in 
the starlight, or when the road dipped into valleys 
where the ruts were already stiffening into ironlike 
shards that clattered beneath Perry’s hooves, they stood 
darkly towering and sinister overhead, lifting their 
leafless trees against the spangled sky. Where a stream 
of winter seepage trickled across the road Perry’s feet 
crackled brittlely in thin ice and Bayard slacked the 
reins while the pony snuffed at the water. He drank 
from the jug again. 

He fumbled a match clumsily in his numb fingers 
and lit a cigarette, and pushed his sleeve back from his 
wrist. Eleven-thirty. “Well, Perry,” his voice sounded 
loud and sudden in the stillness and the darkness and 
the cold, “I reckon we better look for a place to hole 
up till morning.” Perry raised his head and snorted, 
as though he understood the words, as though he would 
enter the bleak loneliness in which his rider moved if he 

could. They went on, mounting again. 

The darkness spread away, lessening a little pres- 
ently where occasional fields lay in the vague starlight, 
breaking the monotony of trees ; and after a tirne dur- 
ing which he rode with the reins slack on Perry s neck 
and his hands in his pockets, seeking warmth between 
leather and groin, a cotton house squatted beside the 
road, its roof dusted over with a frosty sheen as ot 
silver. Not long, he told himself, leaning forward and 
laving his hand on Perry’s neck, feeling the wy™’ 
le.ss blood there. “House soon. Perry, if we look sharp. 

Again Perry whinnied a little, as though he under- 
stood, and presently he swerved from the road, and as 
Bayard reined him back, he too saw the faint wagon 
trail leading away toward a low vague clump of trees. 

340 



“Good boy. Perry,” he said, slackening the reins 
again. 

The house was a cabin. It was dark, but a hound 
came gauntly from beneath it and bayed at him and 
continued its uproar while he reined Perry to the door 
and knocked on it with his numb hand. From within the 
house at last a voice, and he shouted “Hello” again. 
Then he added, “I’m lost. Open the door.” The hound 
bellowed at liim indefatigably. After a moment the 
door cracked on a dying glow of embers, emitting a 
rank odor of negroes, and against the crack of warmth, 
a head. 

“You, Jule,” the head commanded, “hush yo’ mouf.” 
The hound ceased obediently and retired beneath the 
house, though still growling. “Who dar?” 

“I’m lost,” Bayard repeated. “Can I stay in your 
bam tonight?” 

“Ain’t got no barn,” the negro answered. “Dey’s 
anudder house down de road a piece.” 

“I’ll pay you,” Bayard said. He fumbled in his 
pocket witii his numb hand. “My horse is tired out.” 
The negro’s head peered around the door, against the 
crack of firelight. “Come on, Uncle,” Bayard added 
impatiently. “Don’t keep a man standing in the cold.” 

“Who is you, white folks?” 

“Bayard Sartoris, from Jefferson. Here.” He ex- 
tended his hand. The negro made no effort to take it. 

“Banker Sartoris’s folks?” 

“Yes. Here.” 

“Wait a minute.” The door closed. But Bayard 
tightened the reins and Perry moved readily and circled 
the house confidently and went on among frost-stiffened 
cotton stalks that clattered drily about his knees. As 
Bayard dismounted on to frozen rutted earth beneath 

d41 


a gaping doorway, a lantern appeared from the cabin, 
swung low among the bitten stalks and the shadowy 
scissoring of tlie man’s legs, and the negro came up 
with a shapeless bundle under his arm and held the 
lantern while Bayard stripped the saddle and bridle 
off. 

“How you manage to git so fur fum home dis time 
o’ niglit, white folks?” he asked curiously. 

“Lost,” Bayard answered briefly. “Where can I put 
my horse?” 

The negro swung the lantern into a stall. Perry 
stepped carefully over the sill and turned into the 
lantern light, liis eyes rolling in phosphorescent gleams, 
and Bayard followed and rubbed him down with the 
dry ;idc of the saddle blanket. The negro had vanished; 
he now appeared with a few ears of com and shucked 
them into Perry’s manger beside the pony’s eager nuz- 
zling. “You gwine be keerful about fire, ain’t you, 
white folks?” he asked. 

“Sure. I won’t strike any matches at all.” 

“I got all my stock and tools and feed in here,” the 
negro explained. “I can’t affo’d to git burnt out. 
Insu’ance don’t reach dis fur fum town.” 

“Sure,” Bayard repeated. He shut Perry’s stall and 
while the negro watched him he drew the sack forth 
from where he had set it against the wall, and produced 
the jug. “Got a cup here?” The negro vanislied again; 
Bayard could see the lantern through the cracks in the 
crib in the opposite wall; then he emerged with a rusty 
can from which he blew a bursting puff of chaff. They 
drank. Behind them Perry munched his corn. The 
negro showed him the ladder to the loft. 

“You won’t fergit about dat fire, white folks?’ he 

repeated anxiously. 


342 



“Sure,” Bayard said. “Good night.” He laid his 
hand on the ladder, and the negro stopped him and 
handed him the shapeless bundle lie liad brought out 
with him. 

“Ain’t got but one to spare, but it’ll help some. You 
gwine sleep cole, tonight.” It was a quilt, ragged and 
filthy to tlie touch, and impregnated with that unmis- 
takable odor of negroes. 

“Thanks,” Bayard answered. “Much obliged to j’ou. 
Good night.” 

“Good night, white folks.” 

The lantern winked away, to tlie criss-crossing of 
the negro’s legs, and Bayard mounted into darkness 
and the dry, pungent scent of hay. Here, in the dark- 
ness, he made himself a nest of it and crawled into it 
and rolled himself into the quilt, filth and odor and all, 
and thrust his icy hands inside his shirt, against his 
flinching chest. After a time and slowly his hands began 
to warm, tingling a little, but still his body lay shiver- 
ing and jerking with weariness and with cold. Below 
him Perry munched steadily and peacefully in the 
darkness, occasionally he stamped, and gradually tlie 
jerking of Baj'ard’s body ceased. Before he slept he 
uncovered his arm and looked at the luminous dial on 
his wrist. One o’clock. It was already Christmas. 

The sun waked him, falling in red bars through the 
cracks in the wall, and he lay for a while in his hard 
bed, with chill, bright air on his face like icy water, 
wondering where he was. Then he remembered, and 
moving, found that he was stiff with stale cold and that 
his blood began to move through his limbs in small 
pellets like bird-shot. He dragged his legs from his 
odorous bed, but within his boots his feet were dead, 

343 


and he sat flexing his knees and ankles for some time 
before his feet waked as with stinging needles. 

His movements were stiff and awkward and he 
descended the ladder slowly and gingerly into the red 
sun that fell like a blare of trumpets into the hallway. 
The sun was just above the horizon, huge and red, and 
housetop, fenceposts, the casual farming tools rusting 
about the barnyard and the dead cotton stalks where 
the negro had farmed his land right up to his back 
door, were dusted over with frost which tlie sun changed 
to a scintillant rosy icing like that of a festive cake. 
Perry thrust his slender muzzle across the stall door 
and whinnied at his master with vaporous salutation, 
and Ba^’ard spoke to him and touched his cold nose. 
Then he untied the sack and drank from the jug. The 
negro with a milk pail appeared in the door. 

“Chris’mus’ gif’, white folks,” he said, eying the 
jug. Bayard gave him a drink. “Thanky, suh. You 
g’awn to de house to de fire. I’ll feed yo’ hawss. De ole 
w'oman got yo’ breakfast ready.” Bayard picked up 
the sack ; at the well behind the cabin he drew a pail of 
icy water and splashed his face. 

A fire burned on the broken hearth, amid ashes and 
charred wood-ends and a litter of cooking-vessels. Bay- 
ard shut the door behind him on the bright cold, and 
warmth and rich, stale rankness enveloped him like a 
drug. A woman, bent over the hearth, replied to his 
greeting diffidently. Three pickaninnies became utterly 
still in a corner and watched him with rolling eyes. One 
of them was a girl, in greasy nondescript garments, 
her wool twisted into tight knots of soiled wisps of 
colored cloth. The second one might have been either 
or anything. The third one was practically helpless in 
a garment made from a man’s suit of woolen under- 

344 



clothes. It was too small to walk and it crawled about 
the floor in a sort of intent purposelessness, a glazed 
path running from either nostril to its chin, as though 
snails had crawled there. 

The wonmn placed a chair before the fire with a 
dark, cfFacing gesture. Bayard seated himself and 
thrust his chilled feet to the fire. “Had your Christmas 
dram yet, aunty he asked. 

“Naw, suh. Ain’t got none dis year,” she answered 
from somewhere behind him. He swung the sack toward 
lier voice. 

“Help yourself. Plenty there.” The three children 
squatted against the wall, watching him steadily, with- 
out movement and without sound. “Christmas come 
yet, chillen?” he asked them. But they only stared at 
him with the watchful gravity of animals until the 
woman returned and spoke to them in a chiding tone. 

“Show de white folks yo’ Sandy Claus,” slie 
prompted. “Thanky, suh,” she added, putting a tin 
plate on liis knees and setting a cracked china cup on 
the hearth at his feet. “Show ’im,” she repeated. “You 
want folks to think Sandy Claus don’t know whar you 
lives at?” 

The children moved then and from the shadow 
behind them, where they had hidden them w'hen he 
entered, they produced a small tin automobile, a string 
of colored wooden beads, a small mirror and a huge 
stick of peppermint candy to which trash adhered and 
which they immediately fell to licking solemnly, turn 
and turn about. The woman filled the cup from the 
coffee pot set among the embers, and she uncovered an 
iron skillet and forked a thick slab of sizzling meat on 
to his plate, and raked a grayish object from the ashes 
and broke it in two and dusted it off and put that too 

S45 


on the plate. Bayard ate his side meat and hoecake and 
drank the thin, tasteless liquid. The children now 
played quietly with their Christmas, but from time to 
time he found them watching him steadily and covertly. 
The man entered with his pail of milk. 

“Ole ’oman give you a snack he asked. 

“Yes. What’s the nearest town on the railroad?” The 
negro told him — eight miles away. “Can you drive me 
over there this morning and take my horse back to Mr. 
MacCallum’s some day this week?” 

“My brudder-in-law bor’d my mules,” the negro 
replied readily. “I ain’t got but de one span, and he 
done bor’d dem.” 

“I’ll pay you five dollars.” 

The negro set the pail down and the woman came 
and got it. He scratched his head slowly. “Five dollars,” 
Bayard repeated. 

“You’s in a pow’ful rush fer Chris’mus, white folks.” 

“Ten dollars,” Bayard said impatiently. “Can’t you 
get your mules back from your brother-in-law.^” 

“I reckon so. I reckon he’ll bring ’em back by dinner- 


time. We kin go den.” 

“Why can’t you get ’em now? Take my horse and 
go get ’em. I want to catch a train.” 

“I ain’t had no Chris’mus yit, white folks. Feller 
workin’ ev’y day of de year wants a little Chris’mus.” 

Bayard swore shortly and bleakly, but he said: All 
right, then. Right after dinner. But you see your 
brother-in-law has ’em back in plenty of time.” 

“Dey’ll be here; don’t you worry about dat.” 

“All right. You and aunty help yourselves to the 


jug. 

“Thanky, suh.” 

The stale, air-tight room dulled him; the warmth 


346 



was insidious to his bones, wearied and stiff after the 
chill night. The negroes moved about the single room, 
the woman busy at the hearth with her cooking, the 
pickaninnies with their frugal and sorry gewgaws and 
filthy candy. Bayard sat in his hard cliair and dozed 
the morning away — not asleep, but time was lost in a 
timeless region where he lingered unawake and into 
which he realized after a long while tliat something was 
trying to penetrate; watched its vain attempts with 
peaceful detachment. But at last it succeeded and 
reached him : a voice. “Dinner ready.” 

The negroes drank with him, amicably, a little diffi- 
dently — two opposed concepts antipathetic by race, 
blood, nature and environment, touching for a moment 
and fused within an illusion — humankind forgetting its 
lust and cowardice and greed for a day. “Chris’mus,” 
the woman murmured shyly. “Thanky, suh.” 

Then dinner: ’possum with yams, more gray ash 
cake, the dead and tasteless liquid in tlie coffee pot ; a 
dozen bananas and jagged shards of cocoanut, the 
children crawling about his feet like animals, scenting 
the food. He realized at last that they wore holding 
back until he had done, but he overrode them and they 
dined together; and at last (the mules having been 
miraculously returned by a yet incorporeal brother-in- 
law), with his depleted jug between his feet in the 
wagon bed, he looked once back at the cabin, at the 
woman standing in the door and a pale, windless drift 
of smoke above its chimney. 

Against the mules’ gaunt ribs the broken harness 
rattled and jingled. The air was warm, 3'et laced too 
with a thin distillation of chill that darkness would 
increase. The road went on across the bright land. 
From time to time across the shining sedge or from 

847 


beyond brown and leafless woods, came the flat reports 
of g^ns ; occasionally they passed other teams or horse- 
men or pedestrians who lifted dark, restful hands to 
the negro buttoned into an army overcoat, with brief 
covert glances for the white man on the seat beside him. 
“Heyo, Chris’mus I” Beyond the yellow sedge and 
brown ridges the ultimate hills stood bluely against the 
plumbless sky. “Heyo.” 

They stopped and drank, and Bayard gave his com- 
panion a cigarette. The sun behind them now ; no cloud, 
no wind, no bird in the serene pale cobalt. “Shawt days ! 
Fo’ mile mo’. Come up, mules.” Between motionless 
willows, stubbornly green, a dry clatter of loose planks 
above water in murmurous flashes. The road lifted 
redly; pines stood against the sky in jagged bastions. 
They crested this, and a plateau rolled away before 
them with its pattern of burnished sedge and fallow, 
dark fields and brown woodland and now and then a 
house, on into shimmering azure haze, and low down 
on the horizon, smoke. “Two mile, now.” Behind them 
the sun was a copper balloon tethered an hour up the 


sky. They drank again. 

It had touched the horizon when they looked down 
into the final valley where the railroad’s shining threads 
vanished among roofs and trees, and along the air to 
them distantly came a slow, heavy explosion. “Still 

celebratin’,” the negro said. 

Out 'of the sun they descended into violet shadow 
where windows gleamed behind wreaths and paper bells, 
across stoops littered with spent firecrackers. Along 
the streets children in bright sweaters and jackets sped 
on shiny coasters and skates and wagons. Again a 
heavy explosion in the dusk ahead, and they debouch^ 
on to the square with its Sabbath calm, littered too with 


S48 


shattered scraps of paper. It looked the same way at 
home, he knew, with men and youths he had known from 
boyhood lounging the holiday away, drinking a little 
and shooting fireworks and giving nickels and dimes 
and quarters to negro lads who shouted “Chris’mus 
gif’ ! Chris’mus gif’!” as they passed. And out home the 
tree in the parlor and the bowl of eggnogg before the 
fire, and Simon entering his and Johnny’s room on 
tense and clumsy tiptoe and holding his breath above 
the bed where they lay feigning sleep until his tenseness 
relaxed, whereupon they both roared “Christmas gift!” 
at him, to his pained disgust. “Well, I’ll de-clare, ef 
dey ain’t done caught me ag’in !” But by mid morning 
he would be recovered, by dinnertime he would be in a 
state of affable and useless loquacity, and by nightfall 
completely hors de combaty with Aunt Jenny storming 
about the house and swearing that never again should 
it be turned into a barroom for trifling niggers as long 
as she had her strength, so help her Jupiter. And after 
dark, somewhere a dance, with holly and mistletoe and 
paper streamers, and the girls he had always known 
with their new bracelets and watches and fans amid 
lights and music and glittering laughter. , . . 

A small group stood on a corner, and as the wagon 
passed and preceded by an abrupt scurrying, yellow 
flame was stenciled on the twilight and the heavy 
explosion reverberated in sluggish echoes between the 
silent walls. The mules quickened against the collars 
r u rattled on. Through the dusk now, from 

lighted doorways where bells and wreaths hung, voices 
called with mellow insistence; children’s voices replied, 
expostulant, reluctantly regretful. Then the station, 
where a ’bus and four or five cars stood, and Bayard 
escended and the negro lifted down the sack. 

349 


“Much obliged,” Bayard said. “Good-bye.” 

“Good-bye, white folks.” 

In the waiting-room a stove glowed red hot, and 
about the room stood cheerful groups in sleek furs and 
overcoats, but he did not enter. He set the sack against 
the wall and tramped up and down the platform, warm- 
ing his blood again. In both directions along the tracks 
green switch-lights w’ere steady in the dusk; a hands- 
breadth above the w'estern trees the evening star was like 
an electric bulb in a glass wall. He tramped back and 
forth, glancing into the ruddy windows, into the wait- 
ing-room where the cheerful groups in , their furs and 
overcoats gesticulated w'itli festive and soundless anima- 
tion, and into the colored waiting-room, whose occu- 
pants sat patiently and murmurously about the stove 
in the dingy light. As he turned here a voice spoke 
diffidently from the shadow beside the door. “Chris’mus 
gif’, boss.” He took a coin from his pocket without 
stopping. Again from the square a firecracker exploded 
heavily, and above the trees a rocket arced, hung for a 
moment, then opened like a fist, spreading its golden 
and fading fingers on the tranquil indigo sky without 

a sound. i • j 

Then the train came and brought its lighted windows 

to a jarring halt, and he picked up his sack again and 
in the midst of a cheerful throng shouting good-byes 
and holiday greetings and messages to absent ones, he 
fTot aboard. Unshaven, in his scarred boots and stained 
khaki pants, and his shabby, smoke-colored tweed 
jacket and his disreputable felt hat, he found a vacant 
seat and stowed the jug away beneath his legs. 


350 


PART FIVE 


. , and since the essence of spring is loneliness 
and a little sadness and a sense of mild frustration, I 
suppose you do get a keener purification when a little 
nostalgia is added in for good measure. At home I 
always found myself remembering apple trees or green 
lanes or the color of the sea in other places, and I’d be 
sad that I couldn’t be everywhere at once, or that all 
the spring couldn’t be one spring, like Byron’s ladies’ 
mouths. But now I seem to be unified and projected 
single and very definite object, which is some- 
thing to be said for me, after all.” Horace’s pen ceased 
and he gazed at the sheet scrawled over with his prac- 
tically illegible script, while the words he had just 
written echoed yet in his mind with a little gallant and 
whimsical sadness, and for the time being he had 
quitted the desk and the room and the town and all the 
crude and blatant newness into which his destiny had 
r<mght him, and again that wild and fantastic futility 
Of his roamed unchaUenged through the lonely region 
*** ^hich it had at last concentrated its conflicting 
• Already the thick cables alon^ the veranda 
eaves would be budding into small lilac match-points, 
with no effort at all he could see the lawn below 

851 


the cedars, splashed with random narcissi among 
random jonquils, and gladioli waiting in turn to bloom. 

But his body sat motionless, its hand with the 
arrested pen lying on the scrawled sheet. The paper 
lay on the yellow varnished surface of his new desk. The 
chair in which he sat w'as new too, as was the room with 
its dead white walls and imitation oak woodwork. All 
day long the sun fell on it, untempered by any shade. In 
the days of early spring it had been pleasant, falling 
as it now did through his western window and across 
the desk wlicre a white hyacinth bloomed in a bowl of 
glazed maroon pottery. But as he sat musing, gazing 
out the window where, beyond a tarred roof that drank 
heat like a sponge and radiated it, against a brick wall 
a clump of ragged trees of heaven lifted shabby, diffi- 
dent bloom, he dreaded the long, hot summer days of 
sunlight on the roof directly over him; remembered his 
dim and musty office at home, in which a breeze seemed 
always to move, with its serried rows of books dusty 
and undisturbed that seemed to emanate coolness and 
quietude even on the hottest days. And thinking of this, 
he was lost again from the harsh newness in wiiich his 

body sat. Tlie pen moved again. 

“Perliaps fortitude is a sorry imitation of something 
worth while, after all, to the so many who burrow 
along like moles in the dark, or like owls, to whom a 
candle-flame is a surfeit. But not to those who 
peace ajong with them as the candle-flame carries li^ • 
I have always been ordered by words, but it seems that 
I can even restore assurance to my own cowardice by 
cozening it a little. I dare say you cannot read this, as 
usual, or reading it, it will not mean anything to you. 
But you will have served your purpose anyw’ay, thou 
still unravished bride of quietness.” — “Thou wast hap- 

S52 


pier in thy cage, happier?” Horace thought, reading 
the words he liad written and in which, as usual, he was 
washing one woman’s linen in the house of another. A 
thin breeze blew suddenly into the room; there was 
locust on it, faintly sweet, and beneath it the paper 
stirred on the desk, rousing him, and suddenly, as a 
man waking, he looked at his watch and replaced it and 
wrote rapidly : 

“We are glad to have little Belle with us. She likes 
it here; there is a whole family of little girls next door; 
stair-steps of tow pigtails before whom, it must be con- 
fessed, little Belle preens just a little; patronizes them, 
as is her birthright. Children make all the difference in 
the world about a house. Too bad agents are not wnse 
enough to provide rented houses with them. Particularly 
one like little Belle, so grave and shining and sort of 
irrelevantly and intensely mature, you know. But then, 
you don’t know her very well, do you? But we are both 
glftd to have her with us. I believe that 

Harry” The pen ceased, and still poised, he 

sought the words that so rarely eluded him, realizing 
as he did so that, though one can lie about others with 
ready and extemporaneous promptitude, to lie about 
oneself requires deliberation and a careful choice of 
expression. Then he glanced again at his watch and 
crossed that out and wrote : “Belle sends love, O 
Serene,” and blotted it and folded it swiftly into an 
envelope and addressed and stamped it, and rose and 
took his hat. By running he could get it on the four 
o’clock train. 

In January his aunt received a post card from Bay- 
ard mailed at Tampico; a month later, from Mexico 

S53 



City, a wire for money. And that was the*^ast intima- 
tion he gave that lie contemplated being at any given 
place long enough for a communication to reach him, 
although from time to time he indicated by gaudy 
postals where he had been, after the bleak and brutal 
way of him. In April the card came from Rio, followed 
by an interval during which he seemed to have com- 
pletely vanished and which Miss Jenny and Narcissa 
passed quietly at home, their days centered placidly 
about the expected child which Miss Jenny had already 
named John. 

Miss Jenny felt that old Bayard had somehow 
flouted them all, had committed lese majesty toward his 
ancestors and the lusty glamour of the family doom by 
dying, as she put it, practically from the “inside out.” 
Thus he was in something like bad odor with her, and 
as young Bayard was in more or less abeyance, neither 
flesh nor fowl, she fell to talking more and more of 
John. Soon after old Bayard’s death, in a sudden burst 
of rummaging and prowling which she called winter 
cleaning, she had found among his mother’s relics a 
miniature of John done by a New Orleans painter when 
John and Bayard were about eight. Miss Jenny remem- 
bered that there had been one of each and it seemed to 
her that she could remember putting them both away 
together when their mother died. But the other she 
could not find. So she left Simon to gather up the litter 
she had made and brought the miniature downstairs to 
where Narcissa sat in the office, and together they 
examined it. 

The hair even at that early time was of a rich tawny 
shade, and rather long. “I remember that first day,” 
Miss Jenny said, “when they came home from school. 
Bloody as hogs, both of ’em, from’ fighting other boys 

354 


who said they looked like girls. Their mother washed 
’em and petted ’em, but tliey were too busy bragging 
to Simon and Bayard about the slaughter they had 
done to mind it much. ‘You ought to seen the others,’ 
Johnny kept saying. Bayard blew up, of course; said it 

was a damn sliame to send a bov out on the street with 

% 

curls down his back, and finally he bullied the poor 
woman into agreeing to let Simon barber ’em. And do 
you know what? Neither of ’em would let his hair be 
touched. It seems there were still a few they hadn’t 
licked yet, and they were going to make the whole 
school admit that they could wear hair dowm to their 
heels if they wanted to. And I reckon they did, because 
after tw'o or three more bloody" days they came home 
once without any fresh wounds and then they let Simon 
cut it off while their mother sat behind the piano in the 
parlor and cried. And that was the last of it as long as 
they w'ere in school here. I don’t know w hat they kept 
on fighting folks about after tliey went aw'ay to school, 
but they found some reason. Tliat w'as why we finally 
had to separate ’em while they were at Virginia and 
send Johnny to Princeton. They shot dice or something 
to see which one w’ould be expelled, I think, and when 
Johnny lost thc3^ used to meet in New York every 
month or so. I found some letters in Baj^ard's desk that 
the chief of police in New York wTote to the professors 
at Princeton and Virginia, asking ’em not to let Bay- 
ard and Johnn}’^ come back there anj^ more, that the 
professors sent on to us. And one time Baj'ard had to 
pay fifteen hundred dollars for something they did to 
a policeman or a waiter or something.” 

Miss Jenny talked on, but Narcissa w'as not listening. 
She W’as examining the painted face in the miniature. 
It was a child’s face that looked at her, and it was Bay- 

355 



ard’s too, yet there was already in it, not that bleak 
arrogance she had come to know in Bayard’s, but a 
sort of frank spontaneity, warm and ready and gener- 
ous; and as Narcissa held the small oval in her hand 
while the steady blue eyes looked quietly back at her 
and from the whole face among its tawny curls, with 
its smooth skin and child’s mouth, there shone like a 
warm radiance somctliing sweet and merry and wild, 
she realized as she never had before the blind tragedy 
of human events. And while she sat motionless with the 
medallion in her hand and Miss Jenny thought she was 
looking at it, she was cherishing the child under her 
own heart with all tlie aroused constancy of her nature: 
it was as though already she could discern the dark 
shape of that doom which she had incurred, standing 
beside her chair, waiting and biding its time. “No, no,” 
she whispered with passionate protest, surrounding her 
child with wave after wave of that strength which welled 
so abundantly within her as the days accumulated, 
manning her walls with invincible garrisons. She was 
even glad Miss Jenny had shown iier the thing: she 
was now forewarned as well as forearmed. 

Meanwhile Miss Jenny continued to talk about the 
child as Johnny and to recall anecdotes of that other 
John’s childhood, until at last Narcissa realized that 
Miss Jenny was getting the two confused; and with a 
sort of shock she knew that Miss Jenny was getting 
old, tliat at last even her indomitable old heart was 
growing a little tired. It was a shock, for she had never 
associated senility with Miss Jenny, who was so spare 
and erect and brusque and uncompromising and kind, 
looking after the place which was not hers and to which 
she had been transplanted when her own alien roots m 
a far-away place, where customs and manners and even 

356 



the very climate itself were different, had been severed 
violently; running it with tireless efficiency and with 
the assistance of only a doddering old negro as irre- 
sponsible as a child. 

But run tlie place she did, just as though old Bayard 
and young Bayard were there. But at night, when they 
sat before tlie fire in the office, while the year drew on 
and the night air drifted in again heavy with locust 
and with the song of mocking-birds and with all the 
renewed and timeless mischief of spring and at last 
even Miss Jenny admitted that they no longer needed 
a fire; when at these times she talked, Narcissa noticed 
that she no longer talked of her far-off girlliood and of 
Jeb Stuart with his crimson sash and his garlanded bay 
and his mandolin, but always of a time no further back 
than Bayard’s and John’s childhood. As though her 
life were closing, not into the future, but out of the 
past, like a spool being rewound. 

And Narcissa would sit, serene again behind her 
forewarned bastions, listening, admiring more than 
ever that indomitable spirit that, born with a woman’s 
body into a heritage of rash and heedless men and 
seemingly for the sole purpose of cherishing those men 
to their early and violent ends, and this over a period 
of history which had seen brothers and husband slain 
in the same useless mischancing of human affairs; had 
seen, as in a nightmare not to be healed by either wak- 
ing or sleep, the foundations of her life swept away 
and had her roots torn bodily from that soil where her 
forefathers slept trusting in the integrity of mankind 
— a period at which the men themselves, for all their 
headlong and scornful rashness, W’ould have quailed 
had their parts been passive parts and their doom been 
waiting. And she thought how much finer that gal- 

M- 857 



lantry wliich never lowered blade to foes no sword could 
find; that uncomplaining steadfastness of those unsung 
(ay, unwept too) women than the fustian and useless 
glamour of the men that obscured it. “And now she is 
trying to make me one of them; to make of my child 
just another rocket to glare for a moment in the sky, 
then die away.” 

But she W’as serene again, and her days centered 
more and more as her time drew nearer, and Miss 
Jenny’s voice was only a sound, comforting but with- 
out significance. Each week she received a whimsical, 
gallantly humorous letter from Horace: these too she 
read with tranquil detachment — what she could de- 
cipher, that is. She had always found Horace’s writing 
difficult, and parts that she could decipher meant 
notliing to her. But she knew that he expected that. 

Then it was definitely spring again. Miss Jenny’s 
and Isom’s annual vernal altercation began, pursued 
its violent but harmless course in the garden beneath 
her window. They brought the tulip bulbs up from the 
cellar and set them out, Narcissa helping, and spaded 
up the other beds and unswaddled the roses and the 
transplanted jasmine. Narcissa drove into town, saw 
the first jonquils on the deserted lawn blooming as 
though she and Horace were still there, and she sent 
Horace a box of them, and later, of narcissi. But when 
the gladioli bloomed she was not going out any more 
save in the late afternoon or early evening, when with 
Miss Jenny she walked in the garden among burgeon- 
ing bloom and mocking-birds and belated thrushes 
where the long avenues of gloaming twilight reluctant 
leaned, Miss Jenny still talking of Johnny, confusing 
the unborn with the dead. 

358 



Early in June they received a request for money 
from Bayard in San Francisco, where he had at last 
succeeded in being robbed. Miss Jenny sent it. “You 
come on home,” she wired him, not telling Narcissa. 
“He’ll come home, now,” she did tell her; “you see if 
he don’t. If for nothing else than to worry us for a 
while.” 

But a weekJater he still had not come home, and Miss 
Jenny wired him again, a night letter. But when the 
wire was dispatched he was in Chicago, and when it 
reached San Francisco he was sitting among saxo- 
phones and painted ladies and middle-aged husbands 
at a table littered with soiled glasses and stained with 
cigarette ash and spilt liquor, accompanied by two men 
and a girl. One of the men wore whipcord, with an army 
pilot’s wings on his breast. The other was a stocky man 
in shabby serge, with gray temples and intense, vision- 
ary eyes. The girl was a slim long thing, mostly legs 
apparently, with a bold red mouth and cold eyes, in an 
ultra-smart dancing-frock, and when the other two men 
came across the room and spoke to Bayard she was 
cajoling him to drink with thinly concealed insistence. 
She and the aviator now danced together, and from 
time to time she looked back to where Ba 3 'ard sat 
drinking steadily while the shabby man talked to him. 
She was saying, “I’m scared of him.” 

The shabby man was talking with leashed excitabil- 
ity, using two napkins folded lengthwise into narrow 
strips to illustrate something, his voice hoarse and 
importunate against the meaningless pandemonium of 
horns and drums. For a while Bayard had half listened, 
staring at the man with his cold eyes, but now he was 
watching something or some one across the room, let- 

S59 



ting the man talk on unheeded. He was drinking whisky 
and soda steadily, with the bottle beside him. His hand 
was steady enough, but his face was dead white and he 
was quite drunk ; and looking across at him from time 
to time, the girl was saying to her partner: “I’m scared, 
I tell you. God, I didn’t know what to do when you 
and your friend came over. Promise you won’t go and 
leave us.” 

“You scared.^” the a\'iator repeated in a jeering 
tone, but he too glanced back at Bayard’s white, arro- 
gant face. “I bet you don’t even need a horse.” 

“You don’t know him,” the girl rejoined, and she 
clutched his hand and struck her body shivering 
against him, and though his arm tightened and his 
hand slid down her back a little, it was under cover of 
the shuffling throng in which they were wedged, and a 
little warily, and he said quickly: 

“Ease off, sister; he’s looking this way. I saw him 
knock two teeth out of an Australian captain that just 
tried to speak to a girl he was with in a London dive 
two years ago.” They moved on until the band was 
across the floor from them. “What’re you scared of? 
He’s not an Indian ; he won’t hurt you as long as you 
mind your step. He’s all right. I’ve known him a long 
time, in places where you had to be good, believe me.” 

“You don’t know,” she repeated. “I ” 

The music crashed to a stop; in the sudden silence 
the shabby man’s voice rose from the near-by table: 
« could just get one of these damn yellow-livered 

pilots to ” 

His voice was drowned again in a surge of noise: 
drunken voices and shrill woman-laughter and scrap- 
ing chairs, but as they approached the table the shabby 
man still talked with leashed insistent gestures while 

360 



Bayard stared across the room at whatever it was he 
watched, liftings his glass steadily to his lips. The girl 
clutched her partner’s arm. 

“You’ve got to help me pass him out,” she begged 
swiftly. “I’m scared to leave with him, I tell you.” 

“Pass Sartoris out.^ The man don’t wear hair, nor 
the woman neither. Run back to kindergarden, sister.” 
Then, struck with her utter sincerity, he said, “Say, 
what’s he done to you, anyway?” 

“I don’t know. He’ll do anything. He threw an 
empty bottle at a traffic cop as we were driving out 
here. You’ve got ” 

“Hush it,” he commanded. The shabby man ceased 
talking and looked up impatiently. Bayard still gazed 
across the room. 

“Brother-in-law over there,” he said, speaking slowly 
and carefully, “Don’t speak to family. Mad at us. Beat 
him out of his w'ife.” They turned and looked. 

“Where.^” the aviator asked. He beckoned a w’aiter. 
“Here, Jack.” 

“Man with diamond headlight,” Bayard said. “Brave 
man. Can’t speak to him, though. Might hit me. Friend 
with him, anyhow.” 

The aviator looked again. “Looks like his grand- 
mother,” he said. He called the waiter again, then to 
the girl: “Another cocktail?” He picked up the bottle 
and filled his glass and renewed Bayard’s and turned 
to the shabby man. “Where’s yours?” 

The shabby man waved it impatiently aside. “Look,” 
he picked up the napkins again. “Dihedral increases in 
ratio to air pressure. By speed up to a certain point, 
see? Now, what I want to find out ” 

“Tell it to the Marines, buddy,” the aviator inter- 
rupted. “I heard a couple of years ago they got a 

S61 



airy plane. Here, waiter!” Bayard was now watching 
the shabby man bleakly. 

“You aren’t drinking,” the girl said. She touched 
the aviator beneath the table. 

“No,” Bayard agreed. “Why don’t you fly his coffin 
for him, Monaghan?” 

“Me.^” The aviator set his glass down. “Like hell. 
My leave comes due next month.” He raised his glass 
again. “Here’s to wind-up,” he said, “and no heel- 
taps.” 

“Yes,” Bayard agreed, not touching his glass. His 
face was pale and rigid, a metal mask again. 

“I tell you there’s no danger at all, as long as you 
keep the speed below a point I’ll give you,” the shabby 
man said with heat. “I’ve tested the wings with weights, 
and proved the lift and checked all my figures; all you 
have to ” 

“Won’t you drink with us?” the girl insisted. 

“Sure he will,” the aviator said. “Say, you remem- 
ber that night in Amiens when that big Irish devil, 
Comyn, wrecked the Cloche-Clos by blowing that 
A.P.M.’s whistle at the door?” The shabby man sat 
smoothing the folded napkins on the table before him. 
Tlien he burst forth again, his voice hoarse and mad 
with the intensity of his frustration: 

“I’ve worked and slaved, and begged and borrowed, 
and now when I’ve got the machine and a government 
inspector, I can’t get a test because you damn yellow- 
livered pilots won’t take it up. A service full of you, 
drawing flying pay for sitting on hotel roofs swilling 
alcohol. You overseas pilots talking about your guts! 

No wonder the Germans ” 

“Shut up,” Bayard told him without heat, in his 

cold, careful voice. 


$62 



“You’re not drinking,” tl»e girl repeated. “Won’t 
you.^” She picked up !iis glass and touched her lips to 
it and extended it to him. Taking it, he caught her 
hand too and held her so. But again he was staring 
across the room. 

“Not brother-in-law,” he said, “husband-in-law. No. 
Wife’s brother’s husband-in-Iaw. Wife used to be wife’s 
brother’s girl. ISIarried now. Fat woman. He’s lucky.” 

“What’re you talking about?” the aviator demanded. 
“Come on, let’s have a drink.” 

The girl leaned away from him at the lengtli of her 
arm. With her other hand she lifted her glass and 
smiled at him with brief and terrified coquetry. He 
held her wrist in his hard fingers, and while she stared 
at him widely he drew her steadily toward liiin. “Turn 
me loose,” she whispered. “Don’t.” And she set her 
glass down and with the other hand she tried to un- 
clasp his fingers. The shabby man was brooding over 
his folded napkins; the aviator was carefully occupied 
with his drink. “Don’t,” she whispered again. Her body 
was twisted in her chair and she put out her hand 
quickly, lest she be dragged out of it, and for a moment 
they stared at one another — she with wide, mute terror; 
he bleakly, with the cold mask of his face. Then he 
released her and thrust his chair back. 

“Come on, you,” he said to the shabby man. He drew 
a wad of bills from his pocket and laid one beside her 
on the table. “That’ll get you home,” he said. But she- 
sat nursing the wrist he had held, watching him with- 
out a sound. The aviator was discreetly interested ir. 
the bottom of his glass. “Come on,” Bayard repeated 
to the shabby man, and the other rose and follow'ed him. 

In a small alcove Harry Mitchell sat. On his table 
too were bottles and glasses, and he now sat slumped 

363 



in his cliair, his eyes closed and his bald head rosy with 
f)erspiration in the ^low of an electric candle. Beside 
him was a woman who turned and looked at Bayard 
witli blazing and harried desperation. Above them stood 
a waiter with a head like a monk’s and as Bayard 
passed he saw that the diamond was missing from 
Harry’s tie, and he heard their bitter suppressed voices 
as their hands struggled over something on the table 
bevond tlie discreet shelter of their bodies. As he and 
his companion reached the exit the woman’s voice rose 
with a burst of filthy rage into a shrill, hysterical 
scream cut sharply off, as if some one had clapped a 
hand over her mouth. 


The next day ^liss Jenny drove into town and wired 
him again. But when this wire was dispatched Bayard 
was sitting in an airplane on the tarmac of the govern- 
ment field at Dayton, while the shabby man hovered 
and darted here and there in a frenzied manner and a 
group of army pilots stood near by, soberly noncom- 
mittal. The machine looked like any other biplane, save 
that there were no visible cables between the planes, 
which were braced from within by wires on a system of 
springs; hence, motionless on the ground, dihedral was 
negative. The theory was that while in level flight, 
dihedral would be eliminated for si)ced, and when the 
machine was banked, side pressure woultl automatically 
increase dihedral for maneuverability. The cockpit was 


set well back toward the fin. 

“So you can see the wings when they buckle, ^ the 

man who lent him helmet and goggles said drily. “It s 
an old pair,” he added. Bayard glanced at him, coldly 
humorless. “Look here, Sartoris,” the other said, let 
that crate alone. These birds show up here every week 


364 



with something that wll revolutionize flying, some new 
kind of mantrap that flies fine — on paper. If the C.O. 
won’t give him a pilot (and you know we try anything 
here that has a prop on it) you can gamble it’s a wash- 
out.” 

But Bayard took the helmet and goggles and went 
on toward the hangar. The group followed him and 
stood quietly about with their bleak, wind-gnawed faces 
while the engine was wanning up. But when Bayard 
got in and settled his goggles, the man who had lent 
them to him approached and put something in his lap. 
“Here,” he said brusquely. “Take this.” It was a 
woman’s garter, and Bayard picked it up and gave it 
back to him. 

“I won’t need it,” he said. “Thanks just the same.” 

“Well. You know your own business. But if you ever 
let her get her nose down, you’re going to lose every- 
thing but the wheels.” 

“I know,” Bayard answered. “I’ll keep her up.” The 
shabby man rushed up again, still talking. “Yes, yes,” 
Bayard replied impatiently. “You told me all that 
before. Contact.” A mechanic spun the propeller, and 
as the machine moved out toward mid field the sliabby 
man still clung to the cockpit rim and shouted at him. 
Soon he was running to keep up and still shouting, and 
Bayard lifted his hands off the cowling and opened the 
throttle. When he reached the end of the field And 
turned into the wind the man was running toward him 
and waving his arm. Bayard opened the throttle full 
and the machine lurched forward, and when he passed 
the man in mid-field the tail was high and the plane 
rushed on in long bounds, and he had a fleeting glimpse 
of the man’s wild arms and his open mouth as the 
bounding ceased. 


365 


From the V strut out each wing tipped and swayed, 
and he jockeyed the thing carefully on, gaining height. 
He realized that there was a certain point beyond which 
his own speed was likely to rob him of lifting surface. 
He had about two thousand feet now and he turned, 
and in doing so he found that aileron pressure utterly 
negatived the inner plane’s dihedral and doubled that 
of the outer one, and he found himself in the wildest 
skid he had seen since his Hun days. The machine 
not only skidded ; it flung its tail up like a diving whale 
and the air speed indicator leaped thirty miles past the 
dead line the inventor had given him. He was headed 
back toward the field now, in a shallow dive, and he 
pulled the stick back. 

The wing-tips buckled sharply; he flung the stick 
forward just before they ripped completely off, and he 
knew that only the speed of the dive kept him from 
falling like an inside-out umbrella. And the speed was 
increasing; already he had overshot the field, under a 
thousand feet high. He pulled the stick back again; 
again the wing-tips buckled, and he slapped the 
over and kicked again into that wild skid to check his 
speed. Again the machine swung its tail in a 
arc, but this time the wings came off and he duck^ lus 
head automatically as one of them slapped viciously 
past it and crashed into the tail, shearing that too away. 



That day Narcissa’s child was bom, and the follow- 
ing day Simon drove Miss Jenny into towm and set her 
down ^fore the telegraph office and held the horses 
champing and tossing with gallant restiveness by a 
slight^and surreptitious tightening of the rems, while 

866 



beneath the top hat and the voluminous duster he con- 
trived by some means to actually strut sitting down. 
Dr. Peabody found him so when he came along the 
street in the June sunlight, in his slovenly alpaca coat, 
carrying a newspaper. 

“You look like a frog, Simon,” he said. “Where’s 
Miss Jenny?” 

“Yessuh,” Simon agreed, “yessuh. Dey’s swellin’ en 
rejoicin’ now. De little marster done arrive. Yessuh, 
de little marster done arrive en de ole times cornin’ 
back.” 

“Where’s Miss Jenny?” Dr. Peabody repeated im- 
patiently. 

“She in dar, tellygraftin’ dat boy ter come on back 
here whar he belong at.” 

Dr. Peabody turned away and Simon watched him, 
a little fretted at his apathy in the face of the event. 
“Takes it jes’ like trash,” Simon mused aloud, with 
annoyed disparagement. “Nummine; we gwine wake 
’um all up, now. Yessuh, de olden times cornin’ back 
ergain, sho’. Like in Mars’ John’s time, when de Gunnel 
wuz de young marster en de niggers fum de quawters 
gethercd on de front lawn, wisliin* Mistis en de little 
marster well.” And he watched Dr. Peabody enter the 
door, and through the plate-glass window he saw him 
approach Miss Jenny as she stood at the counter with 
her message. 

‘‘Come home you fool and see your family or I will 
have you arrested,” the message read in her firm, lucid 
script. “It’s more than ten words,” she told the oper- 
ator, “but that don’t matter this time. He’ll come now ; 
you watch. Or I’ll send the sheriff after him, sure as 
his name’s Sartoris.” 

ma’am,” the operator said. He was apparently 

S67 


having trouble reading it, and he looked up after a 
moment and was about to speak, when Miss Jenny 
remarked his distraction and repeated the message 
briskly. 

“And make it stronger than that, if you want to,” 
she added. 

“Yes, ma’am,” he said again, and he ducked down 
behind his desk, and presently and with a little mount- 
ing curiosity and impatience Miss Jenny leaned across 
the counter with a silver dollar in her fingers and 
watched him count the words three times in a sort of 
painful flurry. 

“What’s the matter, young man?” she demanded. 
“The government don’t forbid the mentioning of a 
day-old child in a telegram, does it?” 

The operator looked up. “Yes, ma’am, it’s all right,” 
he said at last, and she gave him the dollar and as he 
sat holding it in his hand and Miss Jenny watched him 
w'ith yet more impatience, Dr. Peabody came in and 
touched her arm. 


“Come away, Jenny,” he said. 

“Good morning,” she said, turning at his voice. 
“Well, it’s about time you took notice. This is the first 
Sartoris you’ve been a day late on in how many yea^ 
Loosh? And soon as I get that fool boy home, it 11 be 

like old times again, as Simon says.” 

“Yes. Simon told me. Come along here.” 

“Let me get my change.” She turned to the counter, 
where the operator stood with tiie message in one hand 
and the coin in the other. “Well, young man? Am t a 


dollar enough?” ^ t> u 

“Yes, ma’am,” he repeated, turning on Dr. Peabody 

his dumb, distracted eyes. Dr. Peabody reached fatly 

and took the message and the coin from him. 


368 



“Come along, Jenny,” he said again. Miss Jenny 
stood motionless for a moment, in her black silk dress 
and her black bonnet set squarely on her l^ead, staring 
at him with her piercing old eyes that saw so much and 
so truly. Then she walked steadily to the door and 
stepped into the street and waited until he joined her, 
and her hand was steady too as she took the folded 
paper he offered. Mississippi aviator it said in discreet 
capitals, and she returned it to him immediately and 
from her waist she took a small sheer handkerchief and 
wiped her fingers lightly. 

“I donH have to read it,” she said. “They never get 
into the papers but one way. And I know that he was 
somewhere he had no business being, doing something 
that wasn’t any affair of liis.” 

“Yes,” Dr. Peabody said. He followed lier to the 
carriage and put his hands clumsily on her as she 
mounted. 

“Don’t paw me, Loosh,” she snapped; “I’m nob a 
cripple.” But he supported her elbow with his huge, 
gentle hand until she was seated ; then he stood with his 
hat off while Simon laid the linen robe across her knees. 

“Here,” he said, extending her the silver dollar. She 
returned it to her bag and clicked it shut and wiped her 
fingers again on her handkerchief. 

“Well,” she said. Then : “Thank God that’s the last 
one. For a while, anyway. Home, Simon.” 

Simon sat magnificently, but under the occasion he 
unbent a little. “When you gwine come out en see de 
young marster, Doctuh.^” 

“Soon, Simon,” he answered, and Simon clucked to 
the horses and wheeled away with a flourish, his hat 
tilted and the whip caught smartly back. Dr. Peabody 
stood in the street, a shapeless hogshead of a man in a 

369 


shabby alpaca coat, his hat in one hand and the folded 
newspaper and the yellow unsent message in the other, 
until Miss Jenny’s straight slender back and the 
square, indomitable angle of her bonnet had passed 
from sight. 


But that was not the last one. One morning a week 
later, Simon was found in a negro cabin in town, his 
grizzled head crushed in by a blunt instrument anony- 
mously wielded. 

“In whose house?” Miss Jenny demanded into the 
telephone. In that of a woman named Meloney Harris, 
the voice told her. Meloney . . • Mel . . . Belle Mit- 
chell’s face flashed before her mind, and she remem- 
bered : the mulatto girl whose smart cap and apron and 
lean, shining shanks had lent such an air to Belle s 
parties, and who had quit Belle in order to set up a 
beauty parlor. Miss Jenny thanked the voice and hung 


up the receiver. ^ 

“The old grayheaded reprobate,” she said, and she 

went into old Bayard’s office and sat down. “So that s 
where that church money went that he ‘put out. I 
wondered. . . She sat stiffly and uncomprormsmg y 
erect in her chair, her hands idle on her lap. Well, 
that is the last one of ’em,” she thought. But no, he was 
hardly a Sartoris: he had at least some shadow of a 

said, who had not spent a day in bed since^ she was 
forty years old, “that I’ll be sick for a while. 

And she did just exactly that Went to ^ 
she lay propped on pillows in a frivolous lace cap, and 
wouM permTno doctor to see her save Dr. Peabody, 
who called once informally and jb^pishly for 
thirty minutes while Miss Jenny vented her invahd s 

370 



spleen and the recurred anger of the salve fiasco on 
him. And here she held daily councils with Isom and 
£lnora, and at the most unexpected moments she would 
storm with unimpaired vigor from her window at Isom 
and Caspey in the yard beneath. 

The child and the placid, gaily turbaned mountain 
who superintended his hours, spent most of the day in 
this room, and presently Narcissa herself ; and the 
three of them would sit for rapt, murmurous hours in 
a sort of choral debauch of abnegation while the object 
of it slept digesting, waked, stoked himself anew, and 
slept again. 

“He’s a Sartoris, all right,” Miss Jenny said, “but 
an improved model. He hasn’t got that wild look of ’em. 
I believe it was the name. Bayard. We did well to name 
him Johnny.” 

“Yes,” Narcissa said, watching her sleeping son with 
grave and tranquil serenity. 

And there Aliss Jenny stayed until her while was up. 
Three weeks it was. She set the date before she went to 
bed and held to it stubbornly, refusing even to rise and 
attend the christening. That day fell on Sunday. It 
Was late in June and jasmine drifted into the house in 
steady waves. Narcissa and the nurse, in an even more 
gaudy turban, had brought the baby, bathed and gar- 
nished and scented in his ceremonial robes, in to her, 
and later she heard them drive away in the carriage, 
and then the house was still again. The curtains stirred 
peacefully at the windows, and all the peaceful scents 
of summer came up on the sunny breeze, and sounds — 
birds, somewhere a Sabbath bell, and Klnora’s voice, 
chastened a little by her recent bereavement but still 
rich and mellow as she went about getting dinner. She 

371 


sang sadly and endlessly and without words as she 
moved about the kitchen, but she broke off short when 
she looked around and saw Miss Jenny, looking a little 
frail but dressed and erect as ever, in the door. 

“Miss Jenny ! Whut in de worl’ ! You git on back to 
yo’ bed. Here, lemme he’p you back.” But Miss Jenny 

came firmly on. 

“Where’s Isom?” she demanded. 

“He at de barn. You come on back to bed. I’m gwine 


tell Miss Narcissa on you.” 

“Get away,” IMiss Jenny said. “I’m tired of staying 

in the house. I’m going to town. Call Isom.” Elnora 

protested still, but Miss Jenny insisted coldly, and 

Elnora went to the door and called Isom and returned, 

portentous with pessimistic warnings, and presently 

Isom entered. au % 

“Here,” Miss Jenny said, handing him the Keys. 

“Get the car out.” Isom departed and Miss Jenny fol- 
lowed more slowly. Elnora would have followed too^ 
darkly solicitous, but Miss Jenny sent her back to h 
kitchen ; and she crossed the yard and got m bes^ 
Isom. “And you drive tins thing careful, boy,^^ she told 
him “or I’ll get over there and do it myselt. ^ ^ 
When they reached town, from slender spires rising 

«rrainst the puffy clouds of summer, bells 
among trees, P ^ Miss Jenny 

were ringing lazily. At tne cug followed 

she explained. I m no g S enough.” Just from 

a. .. . 

‘Si™ .h. 

sn 



proper, and Isom led her to Simon’s grave. Simonas 
burying society had taken care of him, and after three 
weeks the mound was still heaped with floral designs 
from which the blooms had fallen, leaving a rank, lean 
mass of stems and peacefully rusting wire skeletons. 
Elnora, some one, had been before her, and the grave 
was bordered with tedious rows of broken gaudy bits 
of crockery and of colored glass. “I reckon he’ll have 
to have a headstone, too,” Miss Jenny said aloud, and 
turning, saw Isom hauling his overalled legs into a tree 
about which two catbirds W’hirled and darted in scold- 
ing circles. “You, Isom.” 

“Yessum.” Isom dropped obediently to the ground 
and the birds threatened him with a final burst of 
hysterical profanity. They entered the white folks’ 
section and passed now between marble sliapes bearing 
names that she knew well, and dates in stark and peace- 
ful simplicity in the impervious stone. Now and then 
they were surmounted by symbolical urns and doves 
and surrounded by clipped, tended sward green against 
the blanched marble and the blue dappled sky and the 
black cedars from amid which doves crooned, endlessly 
reiterant. Here and there bright unfaded flowers lay in 
random bursts against the pattern of white and green, 
and presently John Sartoris lifted his stone back and 
his fulsome gesture amid a clump of cedars beyond 
which the bluff sheared sharply away into the valley. 

Bayard’s grave too was a shapeless mass of withered 
flowers, and Miss Jenny had Isom clear them off and 
carry them away. The masons were preparing to lay 
the curbing around it, and the headstone itself sat near 
by beneath a canvas covering. She lifted the canvas 
and read the clean, new lettering-: Bayard Sartoris. 
March 16, 1893 — June 11, 1920. That was better. 

873 


Simple: no Sartoris man to invent bombast to put on 
it. Can’t even lie dead in the ground without strutting 
and swaggering. Beside the grave was a second head- 
stone, like the other save for the inscription. But the 
Sartoris touch was here, despite the fact that there was 
no grave to accompany it; and the whole thing was 
like a boastful voice in an empty church. Yet withal 
there was something else, as though the merry wild 
spirit of him who had laughed away so much of his 
heritage of humorless and fustian vainglory managed 
somehow even yet, though his bones lay in an anony- 
mous grave beyond seas, to soften the arrogant gesture 
with which they had bade him farewell: 


LIEUT. JOHN SARTORIS, R.A.F. 

Killed in action, July 5, 1918 

‘I bare him on eagles’ wings 
and brought him unto Me’ 

A faint breeze soughed in the cedars like a long sigh, 
and the branches moved gravely in it. Across the spaced 
tranquillity of the marble shapes the doves crooned 
their endless rising inflections. Isom returned for an- 
other armful of withered flowers and bore it 

Old Bayard’s headstone was simple too, having been 
born, as he had, too late for one war and too soon for 
the next, and she thought what a joke They had played 
him— forbidding him opportunities for swash- 
buckling and then denying him the privilege of being 
buried by men, who would have °’s 

i^d John’s wife’s graves. Sunlight reached them only 

1L'£s ’onlfwitl difficulty could the inscription 
have been deciphered. But she knew what it would be, 

37-4 



what with the virus, the inspiration and example oi that 
one which dominated them all, which gave the whole 
place, in which weary people were supposed to be rest- 
ing, an orotund solemnity having no more to do with 
mortality than the bindings of books have to do with 
their characters, and beneath which the headstones of 
the wives whom they had dragged into their arrogant 
orbits were, despite their pompous genealogical refer- 
ences, modest and effacing as the song of thrushes be- 
neath the eyrie of an eagle. 

He stood on a stone pedestal, in his frock coat and 
bareheaded, one leg slightly advanced and one liand 
resting lightly on the stone pylon beside him. His head 
was lifted a little in that gesture of haughty pride 
which repeated itself generation after generation with 
a fateful fidelity, his back to the world and his carven 
eyes gazing out across the valley where his railroad 
ran, and the blue changeless hills beyond, and beyond 
tliat, the ramparts of inhnity itself. The pedestal and 
effigy were mottled with seasons of rain and sun and 
with drippings from the cedar branches, and the bold 
carving of the letters was bleared with mold, yet still 
decipherable : 

COLONEL JOHN SARTORIS, C.S.A. 

1823 1876 

Soldier, Statesman, Citizen of the World 

For ipan*s enlightenment he lived 
By man*s ingratitude he died 

Pause here, son of sorrow; remember death 

This inscription had caused some furore on the part 
of the slayer’s family, and a formal protest had fol- 
lowed. But in complying with popular opinion, old 
Bayard had had his revenge: he caused the line “By 

375 


man’s ingratitude he died” to be chiseled crudely out, 

and added beneath it: “Fell at the hand of Red* 

law. Sept. 4*, 1876.” 

Miss Jenn}^ stood for a time, musing, a slender, 
erect figure in black silk and a small, uncompromising 
black bonnet. The wind drew among the cedars in long 
sighs, and steadily as pulses the sad hopeless reiteration 
of the doves came along the sunny air. Isom returned 
for the last armful of dead flowers, and looking out 
across the marble ^dstas where the shadows of noon 
moved, she watched a group of children playing quietly 
and a little stiffly in their bright Sunday finery, among 
the tranquil dead. Well, it was the last one, at last, 
gathered in solemn conclave about the dying reverber- 
ation of their arrogant lusts, their dust raoldering 
quietly beneath the pagan symbols of their vainglory 
and the carven gestures of it in enduring stone; and 
she remembered something Narcissa had said once, 
atout a world without men, and wondered if therein 
lay peaceful avenues and dwellings thatched with quiet; 

and she didn’t know. 

Isom returned, and as they moved away Dr. Pea- 
body called her name. He was dressed as usual in his 
shabby broadcloth trousers and his shiny alpaca coat 
and floppy Panama hat, and his son was with hini. 

“Well, boy,” Miss Jenny said, giving young Loosh 
her hand. His face was big-boned and roughly molded. 
He had a thatch of straight, stiff black hair and Ins 
eyes were steady and brown and his mouth was large, 
and in all his ugly face there was reliability and gently 
ness and humor. He was raw-boned and he wore his 
clothing awkwardly, and his hands were large and bony 
and with them he performed delicate surgical opera- 
tions with the deftness of a hunter skinning a squirrel 
and with the celerity of a prestidigitator. He hved m 

376 



New York, where he was associated with a surgeon 
whose name was a household word, and once a year 
and sometimes twice he rode thirty-six hours on the 
train, spent twenty hours with his father (which they 
passed walking about town or riding about the country- 
side in the sagging buckboard all day and sitting on 
the veranda or before the fire all night, talking) and 
took the train again and, ninety-two hours later, was 
back at his clinic. He was thirty years old, only child 
of the woman Dr. Peabody had courted for fourteen 
years before he was able to marry her. The courtship 
was during the days when he physicked and amputated 
the whole county by buckboard; often after a year’s 
separation he would drive forty miles to see her, to be 
intercepted on the way and deflected to a childbed or 
a mangled limb, with only a scribbled message to as- 
suage the interval of another year. “So you’re home 
again, are you?” Miss Jenny asked. 

“Yes, ma’am. And find you as spry and handsome 
as ever.” 

“Jenny’s too bad-tempered to ever do anything but 
dry up and blow away,” Dr. Peabody said. 

“You’ll remember I never let you wait on me when 
I’m not well,” she retorted. “I reckon you’ll be tearing 
off again on the next train, won’t you?” she asked 
young Loosh. 

“Yessum, I’m afraid so. My vacation hasn’t come 
due, yet.” 

“Well, at this rate you’ll spend it in an old men’s 
home somewhere. Why don’t you all come out and have 
dinner, so he can see the boy?” 

“I’d like to,” young Loosh answered, “but I don’t 
have time to do all the things I want to, so I just make 
up my mind not to do any of ’em. Besides, I’ll have to 
spend this afternoon fishing,” he added. 

377 


“Yes,” his father put in, “and choppin’ up good fish 
with a pocket knife just to see what makes ’em go. 
Lemme tell you what he did this mawnin’ : he grabbed 
up that dawg that Abe shot last winter and laid its leg 
open and untangled them ligaments so quick that Abe 
not only didn’t know what he was up to, but even the 
dawg didn’t know it ’til it was too late to holler. Only 
you forgot to dig a little further for his soul,” he 
added to his son. 

“You don’t know if he hasn’t got one,” young Loosh 
said, unruffled. “Dr. Straud has been experimenting 

with electricity ; he says he believes the soul ” 

“Fiddlesticks,” Miss Jenny interrupted. “You’d 
better get him a jar of Will Falls’ salve to carry back 
to his doctor, Loosh. Well”— she glanced at the sun— 
“I’d better be going. If you won’t come out to din- 


ner 




“Thank you, ma’am,” young Loosh answered. 

His father said: “I brought him in to show him that 
collection of yours. We didn’t know we looked that 

yourself,” Miss Jenny answered. She went 
on, and they stood and watched her trim back until she 

passed out of sight beyond the cedars. 

“And now there’s another one,” young 
musingly. “Another one to grow up and keep his folks 

in a stew until he finally succeeds m doing ^ 

in a un j Benbow blood 

all expect him to ao- »veii, «« thaf 

till sort of hold him down. They’re quiet folfa, that 

gil atd Horace sort of . . . andjustwomentora.se 

His father grunted. “He’s got Sartoris blood in him, 


too.” 

Miss Jenny arrived home, looking a little spent, and 

S78 



Narcissa scolded her and at last prevailed on her to lie 
down after dinner. And here she had dozed while the 
drowsy afternoon wore away, and waked to lengthen- 
ing shadows and a sound of piano keys touched softly 
below stairs. “I’ve slept all afternoon,” she told her- 
self, in a sort of consternation ; yet she lay for a time 
yet while the curtains stirred faintly at the windows 
and the sound of the piano came up mingled with the 
jasmine from the garden and with the garrulous even- 
song of sparrows from the mulberry trees in the back 
yard. She rose and crossed the hall and entered Nar- 
cissa’s room, where the child slept in its crib. Beside 
him the nurse dozed placidly. Miss Jenny tiptoed out 
and descended the stairs and entered the parlor and 
drew her chair out from beliind tlie piano. Narcissa 
stopped playing. 

“Do you feel rested.^” she asked. “You shouldn’t 
have done that this morning.” 

“Fiddlesticks,” Miss Jennie rejoined. “It always 
does me good to see all tliose fool pompous men lying 
there with their marble mottoes and things. Thank the 
Lord, none of ’em will have a chance at me. I reckon 
the Lord knows His business, but I declare, sometimes 
• . . Play something.” 

Narcissa obeyed, touching the keys softly, and Miss 
Jenny sat listening for a while. The evening drew subtly 
onward ; the shadows in the room grew more and more 
palpable. Outside the sparrows gossiped in shrill 
clouds. From the garden jasmine came in to them 
steady as breathing, and presently Miss Jenny roused 
and began to talk of the child. Narcissa played quietly 
on, her white dress with its black ribbon at the waist 
vaguely luminous in the dusk, with a hushed sheen like 
wax. Jasmine drifted and drifted; the sparrows were 
still now, and Miss Jenny talked on in the twilight 

S79 


about little Johnny while Narcissa played with rapt 
inattention, as though she were not listening. Then, 
without ceasing and without turning her head, she 
said : 

“He isn’t John. He’s Benbow Sartoris.” 

“What?” 

“His name is Benbow Sartoris,” she repeated. 

Miss Jenny sat quite still for a moment. In the next 
room Elnora moved about, laying the table for sup- 
per. “And do you tliink that’ll do any good?” Miss 
Jenny demanded. “Do you think you can change one 


of ’em with a name?” 

The music went on in the dusk softly ; the dusk was 
peopled witli ghosts of glamorous and old disastrous 
things. And if they wore just glamorous enough, there 
was sure to be a Sartoris in them, and then they were 
sure to be disastrous. Pawns. But the Player, and the 
game He plays ... He must have a name for His 
pawns, though. But perhaps Sartoris is the game it- 
self — a game outmoded and played with pawns shaped 
too late and to an old dead pattern, and of which the 
Player Himself is a little wearied. For there is death 
in the sound of it, and a glamorous faUlity, like silver 
pennons downrushing at sunset, or a dying fall of 

horns along the road to Roncevaux. ^ ^ _ 

“Do you think,” Miss Jenny repeated, “that because 

his name is Benbow, he’ll be any less a Sartoris and a 

scoundrel and a fool?” , , , 

Narcissa played on as though she were not listen- 
ing. Then she turned her head and without stopping 
her hands she smiled at Miss Jenny quietly, a little 
dreamily, with serene, fond detachment. Beyond Miss 
Jenny’s trim, fading head the maroon curtains hung 
motionless ; beyond the window evening was a windless 
lilac dream, foster dam of quietude and peace. 



THE EHD 