A Point of Law


Lucas pushed his chair back from the supper table and got up. He gave the sullen and watchful face of his daughter, Nat, a single grim-veiled look. “Gwine down the road,” he said.

“Whar you gwine dis time er night?” his wife demanded. “Messin’ around up yon in de bottom all last night; gittin’ back just in time to hitch up and be in de field when de sun cotch you! You needs to be in bed if you gonter git done plantin’ fo’ Roth Edmonds—”

But then he was out of the house and did not need to hear her any longer, in the road now which ran pale and dim beneath the moonless sky of corn-planting time, between the fields where next month, when the whippoorwills began, he would plant his cotton, to the big gate from which the private road mounted among oaks to the crest where the bright lamps of his landlord’s house gleamed.

He had nothing against George Wilkins personally. If George Wilkins had just stuck to farming, to working the land which he too share-cropped from Roth Edmonds, he, Lucas, would just as soon Nat were married to George as anybody else, sooner than most of the other buck niggers in that neighborhood. But he was not going to let George Wilkins or anybody else move into the country where he had lived for forty-five years and set up in competition with him in a business which he had established and nursed carefully and discreetly for almost twenty years, ever since he built his first still, secretly and at night since nobody needed to tell him what Roth Edmonds would do if he found out about it.

He wasn’t afraid that George would cut into his established clientele, his old regular customers, with the sort of hog swill which George Wilkins had begun to manufacture three months ago and called whisky. But George Wilkins was a fool without discretion, who sooner or later would inevitably be caught, whereupon for the next ten years every bush on Roth Edmonds’ place would have a deputy sheriff squatting behind it all night long. And he, Lucas, not only wasn’t going to let his daughter become the wife of a fool, he didn’t intend to have a fool living on the same place he lived on.

When he reached the big house, he didn’t mount the steps. Instead he stood on the ground, rapping on the edge of the veranda with his knuckles until Edmonds came to the door, peering into the darkness. “Who is it?” he said.

“Luke,” Lucas said.

“Come in to the light,” Edmonds said.

“I’ll talk here,” Lucas said.

Edmonds approached. Lucas was the older of the two; in fact, he had been on the place, living in the same house and working the same acres for twenty-five years when Carothers Edmonds’ father died. Lucas was at least sixty; it was known that he had one daughter with grandchildren, and he was probably more solvent than Edmonds, since he owned nothing he had to pay taxes on and keep repaired and fenced and ditched and fertilized.

Yet now he became, not the Negro which he was, but nigger—not secret so much as impenetrable, not servile and not effacing, but standing motionless in the half-dark below the white man in an aura of timeless and impassive stupidity like a smell almost.

“George Wilkins is running a kettle in that gully behind the old west field,” he said in a voice perfectly flat and uninflectioned. “If they wants the whisky too, tell um to look under his kitchen floor.”

“What?” Edmonds said. He began to roar—a quick-tempered man at best: “Didn’t I tell you niggers what I was going to do the first time I found a drop of white mule whisky on this place?”

“George Wilkins gonter hear you too,” Lucas said. “You didn’t need to told me. I been on this place forty-five years and you ain’t never heard of me having no truck with no kind of whisky except that bottle of town whisky you and your paw always give me Christmas.”

“I know it,” Edmonds said. “You’ve got better sense, because you knew good and well what I would do if I ever caught you. And George Wilkins will wish by daylight …” Lucas stood, motionless, blinking a little, listening to the rapid clapping of the white man’s angry heels and then to the prolonged and violent grinding of the telephone crank and Edmonds shouting into the instrument: “Yes! The sheriff! I don’t care where he is! Find him!”

Lucas waited until he had finished. “I don’t reckon you need me no more,” he said.

“No,” Edmonds said in the house. “Go on home to bed. I want your south creek piece all planted by tomorrow night. You doped around in it today like you hadn’t been to bed in a week.”

Lucas returned home. He was tired. He had been up most of last night, first following Nat to see if she was going to meet George Wilkins after he had forbidden her to, then, in his secret place in the creek bottom, finishing his final run and dismantling his still and carrying it piece by piece still farther into the bottom and concealing it, reaching home only an hour before dawn.

His house was dark save for the faint glow among the ashes in the room where he and his wife slept—the fire which he had lit on the hearth when he moved into the house forty-five years ago and which had burned ever since. The room where his daughter slept was dark. He did not need to enter it to know it was empty. He had expected it to be. George Wilkins was entitled to one more evening of female companionship, because tomorrow he was going to take up residence for a long time where he would not have it.

When he got into bed his wife said, without even waking: “Whar you been? Wawkin’ de roads all night wid de ground cryin’ to git planted—” Then she stopped talking without waking either, and sometime later he waked.

It was after midnight; he lay beneath the quilt on the shuck mattress, not triumphant, not vindictive. It would be happening about now. He knew how they did it—the white sheriff and revenue officers and deputies creeping up through the bushes with a drawn pistol or two, surrounding the still and sniffing like hunting dogs at every stump and disfiguration of earth until every jug and keg was found and carried back to where the car waited; maybe they would even take a sup or two to ward off the night’s chill, before returning to the still to squat there until George Wilkins walked innocently in.

Maybe it will be a lesson to George Wilkins about whose daughter to fool with next time, he thought.

Then his wife was leaning over the bed, shaking him and screaming. It was just after dawn. In his shirt and drawers he ran behind her, out onto the back porch. Sitting on the ground was George Wilkins’ patched and battered still; on the porch itself was an assortment of fruit jars and stoneware jugs and a keg or so and one rusted five-gallon oilcan which, to Lucas’ horrified and still sleep-dulled eyes, appeared capable of holding enough liquid to fill a ten-foot horse trough. He could even see it in the glass jars—a pale, colorless fluid in which still floated the shredded corn-husks which George Wilkins’ tenth-hand still had not removed.

“Whar was Nat last night?” he cried, shaking his wife by the shoulder. “Whar was Nat, old woman?”

“She lef’ right behind you!” his wife cried. “She followed you! Didn’t you know it?”

“I knows it now,” Luke said. “Git the ax!” he said. “Bust it! We ain’t got time to git it away.” But they didn’t have time for that either. It was the sheriff himself, followed by a deputy, who came around the corner of the house.

“Dammit, Luke,” the sheriff said, “I thought you had better sense than this.”

“That ain’t none of mine,” Lucas said. “You knows it ain’t. George Wilkins—”

“Never you mind about George Wilkins,” the sheriff said. “I’ve got him too. He’s out there in the car, with that girl of yours. Go get your pants on. We’re going to town.”

Two hours later he was in the commissioner’s office in the federal courthouse in Jefferson, inscrutable of face, blinking a little, listening to George Wilkins breathing hard beside him and to the voices of the white men:

“Confound it, Carothers,” the commissioner said, “what kind of Senegambian Montague and Capulet business is this?”

“Ask them!” Edmonds said violently. “Wilkins and that girl of Luke’s want to get married. Luke won’t hear of it, for some reason—only I seem to be finding out now why. So last night Luke came to the house and told me Wilkins was running a still on my land because he knew damn’ well what I would do because I have been telling every nigger on my place for years just what I would do the first time I caught one drop of that damn’ wildcat whisky on my place—”

“And we got Mr. Roth’s telephone message”—it was one of the deputies now—a plump, voluble man muddy about the lower legs and a little strained and weary in the face—“and we went out there and Mr. Roth told us where to look. But there ain’t no still in the gully where he said, so we set down and thought about just where would we hide a still if we was one of Mr. Roth’s niggers, and we went and looked there and sure enough after a while there it was, all took to pieces and hid careful and neat as you could want, in a brier brake in the creek bottom. Only it’s getting toward daylight by that time, so we decide to come on back to George Wilkins’ house and look under his kitchen floor like Mr. Roth said and then have a little talk with George.

“We get there about daybreak and what do we see but George and that gal legging it up the hill toward Luke’s house with a gallon jug in each hand, only George busted the jugs on a root before we could catch them. Then Luke’s wife starts to yelling in the house and we run around to the back and there is another still setting in Luke’s back yard and about forty gallons of evidence stacked on his back porch like he was fixing to hold a auction sale, and Luke standing there in his drawers and shirttail hollering, ‘Git the ax and bust it! Git the ax and bust it!’ ”

“But who do you charge?” the commissioner said. “You went out there to catch George, but all your evidence is against Luke.”

“There was two stills,” the deputy said. “And George and that gal both say Luke has been making and selling whisky right there in Mr. Roth’s back yard for twenty years.” Blinking, Lucas found Edmonds glaring at him, not in reproach and no longer in surprise, but in grim and furious outrage. Then, without even moving his eyes and with no change in his face he was no longer looking at Edmonds, but blinking quietly, listening to George Wilkins breathing hard beside him like one in profound slumber, and to the voices:

“But you can’t make his own daughter testify against him.”

“George can though,” the deputy said. “George ain’t no kin to him. Not to mention being in a fix where George has got to think of something good to say and think of it quick.”

“Let the court settle all that, Tom,” the sheriff said. “I was up all last night and I haven’t even had my breakfast yet. I’ve brought you a prisoner and thirty or forty gallons of evidence and two witnesses. Let’s get done with this.”

“I think you’ve brought two prisoners,” the commissioner said. He began to write on the paper before him. Lucas watched the moving hand, blinking. “I’m going to commit them both. George can testify against Luke, if he wants to. And that girl can testify against George. She’s no kin to him, too.”

Lucas could have paid both his and George’s bonds without even altering the number of figures in his bank balance. After Edmonds had paid for the bonds, they returned to his car. George drove now, with Nat beside him in the front seat, huddled down into the corner of it. When the car stopped at the gate seventeen miles later, she sprang out, still without looking at Lucas, and ran on up the road toward his house. They drove on to the stable, where George got out too. His hat was still raked above his right ear, but his sepia face was not full of teeth as it usually was. “Go on and get your mule,” Edmonds said. Then he looked at Lucas. “What are you waiting on?”

“I thought you were fixing to say something,” Lucas said. “So a man’s kinfolks can’t tell on him in court?”

“Never you mind about that,” Edmonds said. “George ain’t any kin to you and he can tell plenty. And if he should start to forget, Nat ain’t any kin to George and she can tell plenty. You’ve waited too late. If George Wilkins and Nat tried to buy a wedding license now, they would probably hang you and George both. Besides, even if Judge Gowan don’t, I’m going to take both of you to the penitentiary myself as soon as you have laid by. Now you get on down to your south creek field. Don’t you come out until you have finished planting it. If dark catches you, I’ll send somebody down with a lantern.”

He was done in the south creek piece before dark. He was back at the stable, his mule watered and rubbed down and stalled and fed and the gear hanging on its peg beside the stall door, while George was still unharnessing. Then he was walking up the hill in the beginning of twilight, toward his house, not fast; he didn’t even look back when he spoke:

“George Wilkins.”

“Sir,” George said, behind him. Lucas neither slowed nor looked back. They went on, mounting the hill, until they reached the battered gate in the weathered fence enclosing his small dusty yard. Then Lucas stopped and looked back at George behind him, lean, foppish even in overalls, wasp-waisted, with no teeth visible now either in the face sober, not to say grave, beneath the rake of the ruined Panama hat.

“Just what was your idea?” Lucas said.

“I don’t rightly know, sir,” George said. “It uz mostly Nat’s. We never aimed to get you in no trouble. She say maybe ifn we took and fotch dat kettle from whar you and Mister Roth told de shurf hit was and you would find hit settin’ on yo’ back porch, maybe when we offered to help you git shet of hit ’fo’ de shurf got here, yo’ mind might change about loanin’ us de money to—I mean to leffin’ us be married.…” Lucas looked at George. He didn’t blink.

“Hah,” he said. “There’s more folks than just me in that trouble.”

“Yes, sir,” George said. “Hit look like it. I hope it’s gonter be a lesson to me.”

“I hope so too,” Lucas said. “When they get done sending you to Parchman, you’ll have plenty of time to study it.”

“Yes, sir,” George said. “Especially wid you to help me.”

“Hah,” Lucas said again. He continued to stare at George; he raised his voice though only a little: a single word, peremptory and cold, still staring at George: “Nat.”

The girl came down the path, barefoot, in a clean, faded calico dress and a bright headrag. She had been crying.

“It wasn’t me that told Mister Roth to telefoam for dem shurfs!” she said.

“My mind done changed,” Lucas said. “I’m gonter let you and George Wilkins be married.” She stared at him; he watched her gaze flick to George and return.

“It changed quick,” she said. She watched him now. Then he knew she was not looking at him; her hand came up and touched for an instant the bright cotton handkerchief which bound her head. “Me, marry wid George and go to live in dat house whar de back porch is done already fell off of and whar I got to wawk a half er mile and back from de spring to fotch water? He ain’t even got no stove!”

“My chimbley cooks good, and I can prop up de porch,” George said.

“And I can get used to wawkin’ a mile fer two lard buckets er water,” she said.

She ceased, with no dying fall of her high, clear soprano voice, watching her father’s face.

“A cookstove. And the back porch propped up. A well.”

“A new back porch,” she said. She might not have even spoken.

“The back porch fixed,” he said. Then she was certainly not looking at him; again her hand rose, the lighter palm pale, the fingers limber and delicate, and touched the back of her headkerchief. Lucas moved. “George Wilkins,” he said.

“Sir,” George said.

“Come into the house,” Lucas said.

The day came at last. In their Sunday clothes he and Nat and George waited at the gate until the car came down the drive. “Morning, Nat,” Edmonds said. “When did you get home?”

“I got back yistiddy, Mister Roth.”

“You stayed in Jackson a good while.”

“Yassuh. I lef de next day after you and pappy and Gawge went to town wid de shurfs.”

“You and George go on a minute,” Edmonds said. They went on. Lucas stood beside the car. This was the first time Edmonds had spoken to him since that day three weeks ago, as if it had taken that long for his rage to consume itself. Or die down rather, because it still smoldered.

“I suppose you know what’s going to happen to you,” Edmonds said. “When that lawyer gets through with Nat, and Nat gets through with George, and George gets through with you and Judge Gowan gets through with you both. You were on this place with my father for twenty-five years, until he died. You have been on it twenty years with me. Was that still and that whisky they found in your back yard yours?”

“You knows it wasn’t,” Lucas said.

“All right,” Edmonds said. “Was that other still they found hidden in the bottom yours?”

They looked at each other. “I ain’t being tried for that one,” Lucas said.

“Was that still yours, Luke?” Edmonds said. They looked at each other. The face which Edmonds saw was absolutely blank, impenetrable.

“Does you want me to answer that?” Lucas said.

“No!” Edmonds said violently. “Get in the car!”

The square and the streets leading into it were crowded with cars and wagons. Following Edmonds, they crossed the crowded sidewalk before the entrance, in a lane of faces they knew—other tenants from their own farm and from the other farms along the creek, come the seventeen miles also in battered and limping trucks and sedans, without hope of getting into the courtroom itself but only to wait on the street and see them pass—and faces they knew only by hearsay: the rich white lawyers talking to one another around cigars, the proud and powerful of the earth.

Then they were in the marble foyer, where George began to walk gingerly on the hard heels of his Sunday shoes and where Edmonds, at a touch on his arm, looked back and saw in Lucas’ extended hand the thick, folded, soiled document which, opening stiffly at the old hand-smudged folds, revealed among the blunt and forthright lettering above the signature and seal, the two names in the impersonal and legible script of whatever nameless clerk: George Wilkins and Nathalie Beauchamp, and dated in October of last year.

“Do you mean,” Edmonds said, “that you have had this all the time? You have had this all the time?” But still the face he glared at was impenetrable, almost sleepy-looking.

“You hand it to Judge Gowan,” Lucas said.

It didn’t take very long. They sat in a small office, on the edge of a hard bench, decorous and in silence, their backs not touching the bench’s back, while the deputy marshal chewed a toothpick and read a paper. They did not stop in the courtroom. They went on through it, between the empty benches and through another door, into another office, but larger and finer and quieter, where an angry-looking man waited whom Lucas knew only from hearsay —the United States Attorney, who had moved to Jefferson only after the administration changed eight years ago. But Edmonds was there, and behind the table sat a man whom Lucas did know, who used to come out in Old Zach Edmonds’ time thirty and forty years ago and stay for weeks during the quail season, with Lucas to hold his horse for him to get down and shoot when the dogs pointed.

“Lucas Beauchamp?” the judge said. “With thirty gallons of whisky and a still sitting on his back porch in open daylight? Nonsense.”

“Then there you are,” the angry man said, flinging out his hands. “I didn’t know anything about this either until Edmonds—” But the judge was not listening to the angry man. He was looking at Nat.

“Come here, girl,” he said. Nat moved forward a step or two and stopped. Lucas could see her trembling. She looked small, thin as a lath, young; she was his youngest and last child—seventeen, born in his wife’s old age and, it sometimes seemed to him, in his too. She was too young to be married and face all the troubles that married people had to get through in order to become old and find out for themselves the taste and savor of peace. Just a stove and a new back porch and a well were not enough. “You’re Luke’s girl?” the judge said.

“Yassuh,” Nat said. “I’m name Nat. Nat Wilkins, Gawge Wilkins’ wife. Dar de paper fer hit in yo’ hand.”

“I see it is,” the judge said. “It’s dated last October.”

“Yes, sir, Judge,” George said. “We been had it since I sold my cotton last year. We uz married den, only she won’t come to live in my house unto Mister Luke—I mean to I gots a stove and de porch fixed and a well dug.”

“Have you got that now?”

“Yes, sir, Judge,” George said. “I’m just ’fo’ gettin’ hit. Soon as I gits around to de hammerin’ and de diggin’.”

“I see,” the judge said. “Henry,” he said to the marshal, “have you got that whisky where you can pour it out?”

“Yes, Judge.”

“And both those stills where you can chop them up, destroy them good?”

“Yes, Judge.”

“Then clear my office. Get them out of here. Get that jimber-jawed clown out of here at least.”

“George Wilkins,” Lucas murmured, “he’s talking about you.”

“Yes, sir,” George said. “Hit sound like he is.”

But before the next three weeks were up, he had begun to get impatient, probably because he now had so little to do. His land was all planted now, after a good season, the seeds of cotton and corn sprouting almost in the planter’s wheel-print between the brief, gusty rains and the rich flood of the northing sun. One day’s work a week would keep them grassed, so all he had to do now, after slopping his hogs and chopping a little cooking wood, was to lean on the fence in the morning’s cool and watch them grow.

But at last in the third week he stood just inside his kitchen door and saw George Wilkins enter the lot in the dusk and go into the stable and emerge presently leading his, Lucas’, fat middle-aged mare and put her in the spring wagon and drive out of the lot and on. So the next morning he went no farther than his first field and stood in the bright dew looking at his cotton until his wife began to shout at him from the house.

Nat was sitting in a chair beside the hearth where the fire had burned for forty-five years, bent forward, her long hands hanging limp between her knees, her face swollen and puffed again from crying. “Yawl and your Gawge Wilkins!” his wife said when Lucas entered. “Gawn and tell him.”

“He ain’t started on de well,” Nat said. “He ain’t even propped up de back porch. Wid all dat money you give him, he ain’t even started. And I axed him and he just say he ain’t got around to it yet, and I wait and I axed him again and he just say he ain’t got around to it yet. Unto I told him at last that ifn he don’t git started like he promised, my mind gonter change about what all I seed dat night dem shurfs come out here and so last night he say he gwine up de road a piece and do I wants to come home and stay because he mought not git back unto late and I say I can bar de door because I thought he was going to fix about starting on de well.

“And when I seed him catch pappy’s mare and de wagon, I knowed dat uz whar he uz gwine. And it ain’t to almost daylight when he got back and he ain’t only ain’t got nothin’ to fix no porch and dig no well, he had done spent de money. And I told him what I was gonter do and I was waitin’ soon as Mister Roth got up and I told Mister Roth my mind done change about what I seed dat night and Mister Roth start to cussin’ and say I done waited too long because I’m Gawge’s wife now and de court won’t listen and for me to come and tell you and Gawge both to be offen his place by sundown.”

“Dar now,” his wife said. “Dar’s your Gawge Wilkins!” But Lucas was already moving toward the door. “Whar you gwine?” she said. “Whar we gonter move to now?”

“You wait to start worrying about where we gonter move to when Roth Edmonds starts to worrying about why we ain’t gone,” Lucas said.

The sun was well up now. It was going to be hot today; it was going to make cotton and corn both before the sun went down. When he reached George’s house, George stood quietly out from beyond the corner of it. Lucas crossed the grassless and sun-glared yard. “Where is it?” he said.

“I hid it in de gully whar mine use to be,” George said. “If dem shurfs ain’t find nothing de first time, dey might think hit ain’t no use to look again.”

“You fool,” Lucas said. “Don’t you know a week ain’t gonter pass from now to the next election without one of them looking in that gully just because Roth Edmonds told them there was a still in it once? When they catch you this time, you ain’t gonter have no witness you done already been married to since last fall.”

“Dey ain’t gonter catch me,” George said. “I’m gonter run dis one de way you tells me. I done had my lesson.”

“You better had,” Lucas said. “You take that wagon soon as dark falls and get that thing outen there. I’ll show you where to put it. Hah,” he said. “And I reckon this one looks about like that other one that was in that gully, too.”

“No, sir,” George said. “This is a good one. The worm in hit is almost new. That’s how come I couldn’t git him down no more on the price he axed. That porch and well money lacked two dollars of being enough, but I just made that up myself. But it ain’t worryin’ about gittin’ caught that bothers me. What I can’t keep from studyin’ about is what we gonter tell Nat about that back porch and that well.”

“What we is?” Lucas said.

“What I is then,” George said. Lucas looked at him for a moment.

“George Wilkins,” he said.

“Sir,” George said.

“I don’t give no man advice about his wife,” Lucas said.


