Adolescence



I


She was not indigenous to this section. Having been foisted upon it by the blind machinations of fate and of a still blinder county School Board, she would remain, to the end of her days, a stranger to this land of pine and rain gullied hills and fecund river bottoms. Hers should have been a background of faintly sentimental decadence, of formal ease among rites of tea and graceful pointless activities.

A smallish woman with enormous dark eyes, who found in the physically crude courtship of Joe Bunden the false romance with which she had banked the fires of her presbyterian inhibitions. The first ten months of her married life—a time of unprecedented manual labor—failed to destroy her illusions; her mental life, projected forward about her expected child, supported her. She had hoped for twins, to be called Romeo and Juliet, but she was forced to lavish her starved affections on Juliet alone. Her husband condoned this choice of name with a tolerant guffaw. Paternity rested but lightly upon him: like the male of his kind, he regarded the inevitable arrival of children as one of the unavoidable inconveniences of marriage, like the risk of wetting the feet while fishing.

In regular succession thereafter appeared Cyril, one day to be sent to the State Legislature, Jeff Davis, who was finally hung in Texas for stealing a horse; then another boy whom, her spirit broken, she was too apathetic to name at all and who, as a matter of convenience, answered to Bud, and became a professor of latin with a penchant for Catullus at a small mid-western university. The fifth and last was born four years and seven months after her marriage; but from this event she fortunately failed to recover, whereupon Joe Bunden in an unusual access of sentimental remorse named his youngest son for himself, and married again. The second Mrs Bunden was a tall angular shrew who, serving as an instrument of retribution, was known to beat him soundly on occasion with stove wood.

The first official act of the new regime was to dispense with Juliet, which became Jule; and from that day Juliet and her stepmother, between whom an instinctive antipathy had smoldered on sight, hated each other openly. It was two years later, however, before conditions became unbearable. At seven Juliet was an elfish creature, thin as a reed and brown as a berry, with narrow eyes as black and depthless as a toy animal’s and a shock of sun-burned black hair. A hoyden who cuffed her duller witted brothers impartially and cursed her parents with shocking fluency. Joe Bunden, in his periodical fits of maudlin inebriation, wept at the disintegration of his family and implored her to be kinder to her step-mother. The breach between the two was impassable so at last, to attain some sort of peace, he was forced to send Juliet to his mother.

Here everything was different, so much so that her defiant protest against the existing order became only a puzzled belligerence; and, after a while, a negative sort of happiness in the absence of any emotional stress. There was work to be done here as well, in house and kitchen garden, but the two of them lived smoothly together. Her grandmother, having passed the troubling ramifications of sex, was wise; and she controlled Juliet so subtly that there was never friction between them. She possessed at last undisturbed the quiet and privacy she desired.

The household whose storm center she had been would not have known her. The change, coming at a crucial time, had purged her of her fierce sensitive pride, of her restlessness and nervous bellicosity as her former life had purged her of all animal parental affection. The mere mention of father or brothers, however, roused in her all her once uncontrolled turbulence, dormant now, but dynamic as ever.

At twelve she was unchanged. Taller and quieter, perhaps, but still brown and thin and active as a cat; hatless in faded gingham, bare feet or wearing shapeless broken shoes; shy with strangers who occasionally stopped at the house or gawky and uncomfortable in hat and stockings on their rare trips to the county seat. Her father and brothers she avoided always with a passionate animal cunning. She could climb faster and surer than a boy; and naked and flashing, she spent hours in a brown pool of the creek. Evenings she sat and dangled her legs from the edge of the porch while her grandmother from the doorway filled the quiet twilight with burning home cured tobacco.





II


A happy time, with duties to be done, and pride in her flat body, climbing and swimming and sleep. Happier still, for in her thirteenth summer she found a companion. She discovered him while swimming lazily in her pool. Looking up at a sound she saw him, in faded overalls, watching her from the bank. Once or twice before strangers, hearing the splash of her dive, had parted the underbrush upon her. As long as they watched her in silence she regarded them with a belligerent indifference, but once they tried to engage her in talk she left the water in a mounting sultry hatred and gathered up her few garments.

This time it was a boy about her own age, in a sleeveless undershirt and with the sun on his round crisp head innocent of brush, staring at her silently, and it did not even occur to her that she was undisturbed. He followed her slow movements for a while in quiet provincial curiosity and without rudeness, but at last the cool brown flashing of the water was too much for him.

“Gosh,” he said, “kin I come in?”

Lazily floating she made no reply, but he waited for none. With a few uncomplex motions he divested himself of his wretched garments. His skin was like old paper, and he climbed out on a limb above the water. “Whee, watch me,” he shrilled; and writhing awkwardly, dived with a prodigious splash into the pool.

“That aint divin’,” she told him calmly, on his spluttering reappearance, “lemme show you.” And while he floated and watched her, she climbed to the limb in turn and stood precariously erect a moment, her flat gleaming body a replica of his. She dived.

“Gosh, that’s right, lemme see kin I.” For an hour they took turns. At last, wearied and with humming heads, they followed the stream until the water became shallow, and lay down in the hot sand. He told her his name was Lee, “fum acrost the river;” and they lay in silent companionship, falling asleep finally, and awoke hungry. “Les git some plums,” he suggested, and they returned to the pool and donned their clothes.





III


This was the happy time, so clear and untroubled that she forgot it had not been like this forever; that he and she could not remain unchanged, two animals in an eternal summer. Hunting berries when hungry, swimming in the bright hot noon, fishing in the quiet level afternoon, and scuffing the dew-heavy grass homeward in twilight. Lee, surprisingly, seemed to have no responsibilities whatever; he apparently suffered no compulsions at all, nor did he ever mention home or refer to any other life except that which the two of them led together. But this was not strange to her: her childhood had inculcated her with an early realization of the eternal feud between parent and child, and it had never occurred to her that any childhood could be different from her own.

Her grandmother had never seen Lee, and so far circumstances had fallen in with her own wishes: her grandmother should never see him. For Juliet feared the older woman would feel it her duty to interfere in some manner. So she was careful not to neglect her work in any way, or to arouse a suspicion in the other’s mind. With the cunning which a child who learns young from experience gains, she realized that their companionship would remain uninterrupted only so long as it was unknown to those possessing authority over her. She did not mistrust her grandmother particularly, she did not trust any one at all; not even, though certain of herself, Lee’s ability to cope with an older person’s active disapproval.

August came and went, and September. Through October and early November they dived and swam; but after the first light frosts the air became perceptibly cooler, though the water was still warm. They swam now only at noon and afterward lay together, wrapped in an old horse blanket, talking and dozing and talking. Winter followed the late November rains but there was still the brown sodden woods, and they built fires and roasted corn and sweet potatoes.

Winter at last. A time of dark iron dawns and an icy floor to curl the toes of bare feet while she dressed, of fires to be built in a cold stove. Later when heat had clouded the window panes of the tight little kitchen and the dishes and churning done, she cleared a pane with the corner of her apron and staring out, saw him waiting for her, a tiny figure on the brown edge of the bottom land below the house. He had acquired an ancient single barrelled shot gun and they hunted rabbits in the skeletoned cotton and corn fields or futilely stalked ducks in the marshy back-waters. But at last winter was gone.

At last winter was gone. The wind shifted southward and the rains came: the creek was sullenly full, muddy and cold. Then the sun, and they found the first willow shoots and the first red birds like flaming arrows in the tangled brier. The fruit trees bloomed in gusts of pink and white, clustering like fragrant bees about the weathered grey hives of houses and stained hay ricks; and beneath capricious marbled skies on which slender trees drunkenly leaned the wind sucked among the pine uplands like a remote long passing of far away trains.

On the first warm day Lee waited for her impatiently. And she, clattering recklessly and ineffectively at a dark sink, could stand it no longer. “First in,” he whooped when she appeared running, a damp cloth flapping behind, and they raced creekward undressing as they ran. The two plunges were simultaneous, though in her haste she had neglected to kick off her shoes. She stamped out of them to Lee’s raucous merriment, gasping at the shock of the icy water.

“Why, you’ve got white again,” she said in surprise, as he climbed the tree to dive. He was startlingly white: last summer’s tan had faded from them both during the winter, and they felt almost like strangers. During the cold months, as the temperature lowered, she had donned successive layers of clothing: so that now, compared with her former bulk, she seemed extremely thin. She had also, in her fourteenth year, reached the gawky stage; and beside Lee’s smooth ivory symmetry her thin arms and shoulders and little bony hips made her appear almost ugly.

The water was too cold for them so after diving once or twice they got out, shivering, and raced through the woods until their blood was warm again. Then they dressed, and Lee produced two fishing lines and a tin can containing a complexity of red worms. “It’ll be warmer tomorrer,” he assured her.

Not tomorrow, but in a few weeks the water was warmer, and as the days grew longer their strange whiteness of skin disappeared and soon they were as brown as ever. And another year had passed.





IV


They lay together, wrapped in the horse blanket beneath the high bright October noon, dozing and waking; almost too warm in the generated heat of their two young bodies to be perfectly comfortable. The heat, the scratchy roughness of the blanket made Juliet restless: she turned and changed the position of her limbs, and changed again. The sun beat on their faces in a slow succession of blows, too blinding to allow them to open their eyes.

“Lee,” she spoke at last.

“Huh?” drowsily.

“Lee, what you goin’ to do when you get to be a man?”

“Aint goin’ to do nothin’. ”

“Nothin’? How you goin’ to get along without doin’ nothin’?”

“Dunno.”

She raised herself on her elbow. Lee’s tousled round head was burrowed into the hot sand. She shook him. “Lee! Wake up.”

His eyes were startling in his dark face, the color of wood ashes. He closed them quickly, crooking his arm above. “Aw, gosh, what you worryin’ about when we grow up for? I dont want to grow up: I rather stay like this—swimmin’ and huntin’ and fishin’. Aint this better’n bein’ a man and havin’ to plow and chop cotton and corn?”

“But you cant stay like this always: you got to grow up and work some day.”

“Well, les wait till we’re growed up ’fore we start worryin’ about it.”

She lay back again and closed her eyes. Bright sun spots danced before and behind her lids, madly and redly. But she was not satisfied: her feminine insistence was not to be placated so easily. As she was vaguely troubled and sad, like the changing year, with an intimation of mortality and mutability, learning that nothing is changeless save change. They were voluptuously silent in the strong refulgence of sunlight until a sound caused Juliet to open her eyes.

Ludicrously inverted above her stood her grandmother, a shapeless hunched figure against the bland ineffable blue of the sky. The old woman and the girl stared at each other for a space, then Juliet closed her eyes again.

“Git up,” said the old woman.

Juliet opened her eyes and half rose, pushing back her shock of hair with the bend of a bare arm. Lee, motionless on his back, gazed up at the figure standing over them shaking with the palsy of extreme age.

“So this is what’s been goin’ on behind my back, is it? This is how come you never have time to half do your work, hey? This is how come we got to have a nigger to cook and clean up?” She mumbled and chuckled, “Git up, I tell ye.”

They did not move. It had all happened so quickly that their sleep-clogged brains refused to function. So they lay and stared at her while she wagged her mask of a face above them. She raised her stick and shook it.

“Git up, ye slut!” she quavered in sudden anger.

They rose and stood side by side in the implacable sunlight like two bronze carvings. The toothless mouthing face and its bleared dim eyes wavered before them.

“Stark nekked, both of ye. Your paw told me you was wild, but I never thought to find you a layin’ up with some body I never see before. And this aint the first one neither, I bound you! You with your innocent ways, likin’ to fish and roam the country by yerselfl Do you know what you’ve done? Spiled yer chances for gittin’ a decent, well-to-do husband, that’s what you’ve done.”

They gazed at her in speechless amazement and incomprehension.

“Ye needn’t look at me in that know nothin’ way: do you think to fool me after I ketched ye? Aint you a pretty pair, now?” She turned suddenly to Lee. “What’s your name, boy?”

“Lee,” he told her equably.

“Lee who?”

“Lee Hollowell.”

“Lafe Hollowell’s boy, huh?” She turned back to Juliet. “Now aint you a pretty thing, takin’ up with a Hollowell? Lazy, good-for-nothin’, never done a honest lick of work in his life, Lafe never; and now you aint got no better sense than to lay up with one! What you goin’ to do if he gits you with child? Set down on me and let me slave for you, I reckon. If you got to have a man, you better pick one that can support you: no Hollowell never will.”

Juliet sprang like a taut wire. “You—you old bitch,” she screamed from the wreckage of their bright companionship. “Lee, Lee,” she cried in a dull misery of despair.

The other raised her stick in a shaking hand and struck Juliet across the shoulders. “Git your clothes on and go home. Now I’ll ’tend to you,” as Lee sprang forward, trying to grasp the stick. It fell again, across Lee’s back, and again. He leaped beyond her reach. “You git away from here,” she shrilled, “git away, God damn ye! dont never let me see hide nor hair of ye, or I’ll shoot you like a dog.”

They stared at each other, the cautious puzzled boy and the implacable old woman terrible in her rage. Then Lee turned and donned his clothes with swift ease and was gone, whooping through the woods; leaving her, gnome-like and trembling, in the strong quiet sunlight and a slow drifting of scarlet leaves.





V


In the fierce pride of her reserve she smoldered. Outwardly, however, her demeanor was unchanged. Her life with her grandmother, she discovered, had been very pleasant; the other had controlled her to an extent, but now, having blundered once, her authority was gone forever. Meanwhile they lived together in a strained armistice, the elder impersonally querulous, and Juliet in a state resembling a corked champagne bottle.

Her grandmother was getting old, and by imperceptible degrees more and more work devolved upon Juliet. At last, in her fifteenth year, it occurred to her that she was doing nearly all the house work, as well as caring for the stock, though the older woman drove her wasted rheumatic body ineffectually at lesser tasks by the sheer dull rigidity of her will. She must have a fire now, summer and winter; and most of her time was spent sitting in the chimney corner: a toothless obscene mask and a clay pipe in a withered hand, spitting into the flames.

“Grammaw,” she said, not for the first time, “let’s get a cook.”

“Dont need none.”

“But you’re gettin’ old; seems like a nigger’d take a lot of work offen your hands.”

“Sposin’ I never done a lick, aint you strong bodied enough to tend to things? I kep’ up this place twenty two year, alone.”

“ ’Taint any use us a-slavin’ to death when we dont have to, though.”

The other opened her bleared eyes and sucked her pipe to a glowing coal. “Look here, gal; dont you start a-frettin’ about me ’till you hear me complain. Wait ’till you been through what I have; wait ’till you been married and kept carryin’ steady for fourteen years, and seen four out of nine dead and the balance scattered to God knows where without liftin’ a hand for you. You reckon when all that was over and done and Alex dead and buried, that I worried about a little work and none to bother?”

“I know you had a hard time: seems like everybody in this country has a hard time. But, grammaw; seems like we could take it easy now: you done had your trouble and I aint scarcely old enough for mine yet.”

“Huh,” the old woman grunted. “ ’Taint nothin’ but Joe Bunden talkin’ in you now, rank laziness. You aint satisfied lessen you’re tearin’ through the woods: no time for housework any more. Great big gal like you, skeered of a little hard work! When I was your age I was cookin’ and carin’ for a fambly of seven, while you haint no one to do for but me. You haint got enough to do now, that’s what’s wrong with you.” She puffed and nodded in the leaping firelight.

“But, grammaw—”

The other jerked her head up. “Listen to me, gal. I’ve had about all your goin’s on I’m goin’ to stand. I sent your paw word about that Hollowell boy, and he’s comin’ over to see you: like’s not he’ll take ye home with him.”

“I dont care if he does come. I wont let him see me.”

“H’mph. You will if I tell ye, like you’ll go home with him if he wants ye to.”

“I wont go home with him. I’d kill him before I’d let him touch me.”

“Now, aint you talkin’ biggity! What you need is to have a stick took to ye, and I’m a-goin’ to see that Joe does it ’fore you leave here. I wont have nobody around me that wont pay me no mind, that sets out to cross me from natural cussedness.”

“What have I done, grammaw, that aint what you told me?”

“What aint you done? I haint no more control over you than a sperrit; you that’s eatin’ my vittles every day. After I caught ye a-layin up with that triflin’ Hollowell you aint paid me no more mind than if I was Joe, or that wife of his’n.”

“Do you still think that Lee and me—that Lee and me—I—is that the reason you been hectorin’ at me ever since?” she rushed on fiercely, “is that what you think? that me and him— Oh, God, I wisht you wasn’t so old: I’d mash that old face of yours right into the fire. I’d—I’d— I hate you!”

The other stirred in the leaping shadows, the pipe dropped from her trembling hand and she bent over the hearth, vainly searching for it. “Dont talk to me that way, you slut.” She fumbled for her stick, and rose. “Old or no old, I’m spry enough to lick ye to a fair-ye-well.” She raised the stick, and for a space the two of them glared at each other in the intermittent quiet firelight wheeling about them.

“Just touch me with that stick, just touch me,” Juliet whispered through dry lips.

“Tech you! Joe Bunden’ll do that a plenty when he comes, I promise ye. And I bound ye the husband Joe’s picked for you’ll tech ye too; when he hears what folks say about you and that no ’count Hollowell.”

“Husband?” repeated Juliet. The other croaked into laughter.

“Husband, I tell ye. But I hadn’t aimed to tell ye before every thing was ready, you’re so hard headed. But I guess Joe’ll manage ye. I sent word to Joe that I couldn’t manage you; and them folks of yourn dont want ye to home; so Joe’s went and found somebody to marry ye, though God knows where he found a feller’ll take ye. But that’s Joe’s lookout, not mine: I done what I could for ye.”

“Husband?” repeated Juliet idiotically. “Do you think that you and Joe Bunden can both make me get married? Much as I hate you, I’d rather be dead than go back home; and before I’d marry anybody I’ll kill you and Joe Bunden, too. You cant make me!”

The old woman raised the stick. “Shet your mouth!”

“Touch me! Touch me!” Juliet repeated in a taut whisper.

“Darin’ me, be ye?” the other quavered. “Take that, then, damn ye!” The stick fell across Juliet’s breast and arm and an icy wind blew through her brain. She wrested the stick from her grandmother’s hand and broke it across her knee as the other recoiled in fear. She threw the pieces into the fire, and in a voice as light and dry as an eggshell she reiterated senselessly: “You made me do it, you made me do it.”

The older woman’s rage had evaporated. “Dont worry me, gal. Cant let me set in my own chimbley without a-naggin’ and a-frettin’ at me. Aint never a Bunden yet didnt set out to nag and fret me. You and your nigger! Wait ’till I’m dead: ’twont be long, thank God; then you can fill the house with folks to wait on ye.” She dragged herself across the room to the monstrous lowering shadow of her bed—curtained winter and summer— “If you dont like it here, maybe your husband’ll git ye a cook.” She chuckled evilly, and groaned, fumbling in the dark.

Outside the sky was clear, an inverted bowl of dark water floating with stars; and her damp hair stirred upon her brow as though at the touch of a hand. Deliberately she caught and saddled their one ancient horse, and mounting from the water trough, took the road toward town, leaving the gate swinging open behind her. She turned her face once backward to the dark house, repeating: “You made me do it,” then rode onward through the darkness. Soon the last spurt of dust kicked up by the horse’s feet settled, and the road was empty again.





VI


Juliet passed through the next few days somehow. She and her grandmother, by an unspoken agreement, ignored the last scene; and outwardly life moved stagnantly onward, as dull and uneventful as ever. Juliet felt like one who has cast the dice and must wait an eternity for them to stop. And withal, she was vaguely apathetic as to what they might show: her reserve of volition had been expended. Her terror, her fear of what she had done, had flown in the quiet round of duties and dreaming alone in the twilight.

The house was dark, an angle of quietly leaping firelight marked the door of her grandmother’s room. At first she did not see the old woman, then her glance found a withered hand nursing a pipe. “Juliet?” the other spoke from her corner; and Juliet entered, her scornful belligerence rising in her, and stood before the fire. The heat struck pleasantly through her skirt, against her legs. Her grandmother leaned forward until her face hung like a mask in the firelight, and spat.

“Your paw’s dead,” she said.

Juliet gazed at the leaping enormous shadow of the curtained bed. The measured puffs of the other’s pipe beat softly against her ears like moth wings. Joe Bunden’s dead, she thought, without emotion; it was as though her grandmother’s words still hung suspended in the room’s twilight, whispering to each other. At last she stirred.

“Paw’s dead, grammaw?” she repeated.

The old woman moved again, and groaned. “The fool, the fool! All Bundens is fools born: I never see a one yet, ’ceptin’ you, warn’t a natural ijit. I married one, but he died ’fore he done much harm, leavin’ me a run-down farm and a family of chillen. And now Joe has raised a family and left ’em improvident—lessen that woman he married has got more spunk than ever I see in her. Lafe Hollowell warn’t no better, neither. Him and Joe’ll make a pretty pair in hell tonight.”

“What happened, grammaw,” she heard herself ask, in a passionless voice.

“Happen? Joe Bunden was a fool, and Lafe Hollowell warn’t no better, after him and Joe hitched up, anyway.… Joe and him was killed by revenuers last night, at Lafe’s still. Some body rid into town late Wensday night and told Deacon Harvey, and three revenuers come down on ’em last night. Never knowed who told … or likely wouldn’t say.” The old woman nodded and smoked for a while with closed eyes. Juliet stared at the slow wheeling of shadows, quietly in a smooth blending of sadness and unutterable relief. The other’s mumbling materialized about her: “That woman Joe married, soon’s she heard, took and went back home. God knows what’ll become of them brothers o’ yourn: I aint goin’ to have ’em on my hands. And Lafe’s boy—what’s his name? Lee?— he skun out and aint been seen since. Good riddance, I call it.”

The shadows leaped up the wall, and fell; while her grandmother’s words lingered in the dusk like cobwebs. She left the room, and sat down on the floor of the porch with her back against the wall and her legs stiffly before her. Joe Bunden she hated no longer, but Lee, Lee was different, his leaving was more tangible than the death of a hundred men: it was like dying herself. So she sat in the dark, watching her childhood leaving her. She remembered with painful clarity that spring in which she and Lee had first swum and fished and roamed, of those raw blustery days broken to cloud racks above the fallow rain-gullied earth; she could almost hear the cries of men plowing the muddy ground, and the tangled blackbirds slanting down wind like scraps of burned paper … change and death and division.

She rose at last and slowly descended the hill toward the creek, and saw a small dark figure approaching her. Lee! she thought, with a constriction of throat muscles, but it was not Lee: it was too small. The figure, seeing her, stopped, then cautiously approached. “Jule?” it said timidly.

“Who’s that?” she replied sharply.

“It’s me—Bud.”

They stood facing each other curiously. “What are you doing here?”

“I’m goin’ away.”

“Goin’ away? Where can you go to?”

“I dunno, somewhere. I cant stay to home no more.”

“Why cant you stay to home?” Emotions she hated were stirring in her.

“Maw, she’s— I hate her, I aint going to stay there no longer. I never stayed noways, ’ceptin’ fer paw; and now—now paw—he’s—he’s—” he dropped to his knees, rocking back and forth in a recurrence of grief. Juliet drew near him in an access of pity, hating herself. He was a soiled little boy in worn overalls; she decided with difficulty that he must be about eleven years old. Beside him was a bundle knotted in a handkerchief, consisting of a chunk of cold indigestible bread and a dog-eared book of pictures which were once colored. He looked so small and lonely, kneeling in the dead leaves, and the common bond of hatred drew them together. He raised his streaked dirty face. “Oh, Jule,” he said, putting his arms around her legs and burrowing his face into her sharp little hip.

She watched the fitful interruptions of moonlight torturing the bare boughs of trees. Above them the wind sucked with a far sound, and across the moon slid a silent V of geese. The earth was cold and still, waiting in dark quietude for spring and the south wind. The moon stared through a cloud rift and she could see her brother’s tousled hair and the faded collar of his shirt, and her racking infrequent tears rose and slid down the curve of her cheek. At last she, too, was frankly crying because everything seemed so transient and pointless, so futile; that every effort, every impulse she had toward the attainment of happiness was thwarted by blind circumstance, that even trying to break away from the family she hated was frustrated by something from within herself. Even dying couldn’t help her: death being nothing but that state those left behind are cast into.

Finally she jerked the tears from her face and pushed her brother away.

“Get up. You’re a fool, you cant go anywhere like this, little as you are. Come on up to the house and see grammaw.”

“No, no, Jule; I cant, I do’ want ter see grammaw.”

“Why not? You got to do somethin’, aint you? Lessen you want to go back home,” she added.

“Back to her? I wont never go back to her.”

“Well, come on, then; grammaw’ll know what to do.”

He pulled back again. “I’m skeered o’ grammaw, I’m skeered o’ her.”

“Well, what you goin’ to do?”

“I’m goin’ away, yonder way,” pointing toward the county seat. She recognised his stubbornness with a sense of familiarity, knowing he could be forced no easier than she. There was one thing, however, she could do, so she cajoled him as far as the gate onto the road, and left him in the shadow of a tree. Soon she reappeared with a substantial parcel of food and a few dollars in small change—her savings of years. He took it with the awkward apathy of despair and together they moved onto the high road and stopped again, regarding each other like strangers.

“Good bye, Jule,” he said at last, and would have touched her again, but she drew back; so he turned, a small ineffectual figure, up the vaguely indistinct road. She watched him until he was scarcely discernible, soon he was out of sight, and once more she turned and descended the hill.

The trees were still, bodyless and motionless as reflections now that the wind had dropped; waiting pagan and untroubled by rumors of immortality for winter and death. Far, far away across the October earth a dog howled, and the mellow long sound of a horn wavered about her, filling the air like a disturbance of still waters, then was absorbed into silence again leaving the dark world motionless about her, quiet and slightly sad and beautiful. Possum hunters, she thought, and wondered as it died away if she had heard any sound at all.

She wondered dully and vaguely how she could ever have been wrought up over things, how anything could ever make her any way but like this: quiet, and a little sorrowful. Scarcely moving herself, it seemed as though the trees swam up slowly out of the dark and moved across above her head, drawing their top-most branches through star-filled waters that parted before them and joined together when they had passed, with never a ripple or change.

Here at her feet lay the pool: shadows, then repeated motionless trees, the sky again; and she sat down and stared into the water in a sensuous smooth despair. This was the world, below her and above her head, eternal and empty and limitless. The horn sounded again all around her, in water and trees and sky; then died slowly away, draining from sky and trees and water into her body, leaving a warm salty taste in her mouth. She turned over suddenly and buried her face in her thin arms, feeling the sharp earth strike through her clothing against thighs and stomach and her hard little breasts. The last echo of the horn slid immaculately away from her down some smooth immeasurable hill of autumn quiet, like a rumor of a far despair.

Soon it, too, was gone.