Peter


Here was spring in a paved street, between walls, and here was Peter sitting on a stoop, kicking his short legs in brief serge, banging his heels rhythmically against a wooden step. Behind him an arching spacious passage way swam back between walls of an ineffable azure into which one passed as into sleep, sweeping back into light again and a shabby littered court and something green and infernal against a far wall.

“Hello,” says Peter easily, above his thumping heels, above the raucous syncopation of a victrola in which has been prisoned by negroes all the tortured despair of negroes. Peter’s face is round as a cup of milk with a dash of coffee in it.

“My brother is white,” Peter remarks conversationally, in his sailor suit. “Are you going to draw some more?” he asks us, and an old friend stops beside us. An old friend of Peter’s, that is. His flat Mongol face is as yellow as Peter’s and he says: “How, Petuh? You plitty nice boy t’day? Your momma home?”

“Yes, she up stairs talkin’ to man.”

“Your pa home?”

“Naw,” replies Peter. “I aint got no paw, I got a brother, though. He’s white. Like you,” he added to Spratling, whom Peter likes.

“You are pretty white yourself. Aren’t you white enough?” I ask.

“I dont know. My brother he’s little. When he is big like me he wont be so white, I reckon.”

“Pitter,” the Chinese interrupts. “Your mamma talk to man. You go tell her she talk to man enough. You tell her? You nice boy.”

“Ah, you go tell her. She dont mind. She say she can get ’em out quick as any. Sometimes she says she dont let ’em take off their hats. I guess she cant never tell when Eagle Beak’s coming home.”

The Chinaman, his face rife with sex, stared down that ineffable azure passage to where sunlight was like golden water between walls.

“Eagle Beak?” I repeated.

“Yes, that’s right. He’s the one that sleeps with mamma. He works on Dock 5. He can move more cargo than anybody on Dock 5.”

“Do you like Eagle Beak?”

“Sure, he’s all right. He brings me candy. The other one never done that.”

“Never done that?”

“No. He never brought nothing. So mamma run him away.”

The Chinaman entered the passage, we saw his dark figure gain a nimbus of sunlight and turning, disappear.

“Eagle Beak’s all right. We like Eagle Beak,” he added and Hercules in dark bronze passed us. “Hi, Baptis’,” said Peter.

“Hi, big boy,” replied the negro. “How you comin’?” he asked. The light flashed briefly, arcing downward and Peter pounced on a nickel. The man walked down the street, and a corner took him. Spring, scorned by wood and stone, took the air, filled the atmosphere itself, fretful and troubling, and Peter said: “He’s all right. That’s the way he always acks. You got to treat ’em like that, mamma says. And we do.”

Peter with his face round and yellow as a new penny, brooded briefly. What does he see? I wondered, thinking of him as an incidental coin minted between the severed yet similar despairs of two races.

“Say,” he said at last, “can you spin a top? There is a boy lives in that house can spin one end and pick it up on the string.”

“Haven’t you got a top?” I asked.

“Yes, the Baptis’ give me one, but I aint had time to learn to spin it.”

“Haven’t had time?”

“Well, you see, I got so much to do. I have to sit here and tell ’em when mamma’s busy talking to some body. And the others, too. I got to watch out for ’em.”

“Watch out for what?”

“I dont know. Just watch out for ’em. They are nice folks here. Baptis’ says we got the nicest girls in town here. But say, aint you going to draw no pictures today?”

“Yes, I am going to draw a picture of your stair case. How about coming along?”

“I might as well,” Peter told Spratling. “I can see ’em just as well. But you aint going up to mamma’s room, are you?”

“No, no. I’ll draw the passage. But why do you ask?”

“Well, she’s busy talking to that Chink that just went in. She dont like to be bothered while she’s talking to some one.”

“Then I wont bother her. I’ll just draw a picture of the stair case.”

“Well, that’ll be all right, I guess.”

We moved inside: it was like drowning in a sweet and azure sea. “Can I watch?” asked Peter.

“Surely you can. By the way, how would you like to be drawn?”

Peter— I dunno. Can you draw me?

Spratling— I expect so.

Peter— But say, you cant put me in a picture, can you?

A voice— Wait until that chilly breeze catch you in your B.V.D.’s.

Spratling— Certainly I can, if you want me to.

The victrola again broke into a tortured syncopation. Here were dark trees, and stars on an unknown water—all the despairs of time and breath.

A voice— Baby!

Another voice— Break dem springs, if you can.

Peter— That’s Euphrosy: she got more sense than any of these gals, mamma says.

Here was a salmon colored stairway swelling upward, as satisfying as a woman’s belly. Negroes brushed by us: black and tan and yellow faces wrung to an imminence of physical satisfaction. They passed us—Peter in the throes of a self-consciousness and Spratling spreading paper and choosing a crayon, and other negroes passed us, going out, slow with completion and the compulsion of imminent labor (which is worse) all having a word for Peter posing and wrung to a tortured caricature of himself.

A voice— Baby, wrap me round!

A voice— You goddam whore, I’ll cut your th’oat.

A voice— And yo’ heart within you melt, for the sorrows you have felt.

Steps thundered on the stairs, washed clothing flapped in a faint breeze. Negroes came, flushed and gray with sex, negroes went, languorous with repletion. The Chinaman descended. “How, Peter? You plitty boy,” and went away. But Peter did not remark him.

Spratling— Lean against the wall, Peter. Stop wiggling so much! Stand as if God was looking at you.

Peter— Like this? His dark sailor suit took an impossible shape against the azure restful wall. His young body was impossible and terrible.

Spratling— Oh, hell. He cant stand that way, anyhow.

“Go ahead and draw,” I advised, but he was already busy. “If you want to move, Peter,” he said, “go ahead and move.”

But it was a point of honor with Peter not to move. Spratling drew, squinting at him; and I knew that Peter was going to cry. The sunlight was immaculate as a virgin: hanging washed garments were planes of light and a washing line took the golden noon like a tight-rope dancer.

Voice— Baby, sun on me like a gold jail-suit. Makin’ dem barrels roll. Rollin’ dem barrels for you, baby.

A voice— Win th’ee hundred in a crap game last night.

A voice— Come on, big boy, git done. I cant lay here all day.

A voice— All I done, I done for you. When you sad, I’m sad; when you laugh, I laugh.

A voice— Oh, Christ, dont! I never meant it! Dont!

Peter (weeping)— My arm hurts.

Spratling— All right, move then.

Peter— I cant! You wont draw me no more.

A voice— You damn whore.

Peter— (changing his position, thinking Spratling will not notice it.) That’s Joe Lee. He’s always beatin’ Imogene up. Joe Lee’s bad.

I— Bad?

Peter— Sure. He’s killed three. But he’s too smart fer ’em. They cant catch him at it. Mamma always asks Imogene howcome she keeps him, but Imogene dont know. That’s the way women are, mamma says.

Steps on the stairs, and here is Peter’s mother, languorous as a handled magnolia petal. She is as light in color as Peter, and a woman passing says:

“Uh huh, I knowed you’d get in trouble. I told you yo’ maw better not ketch you here.”

“All right. Wait until Imogene beats me like she done you when she caught Joe Lee in your room last week. Then I’ll talk some. Tore your hair out, she did.”

“You ought to beat hell out of him, Mable,” said the woman, passing on.

“Peter,” said his mother.

“He’s drawing me in a picture, mamma. He’ll draw you too, if you will stay.”

She came languorous as a decayed lily and looked at the sketch. “Huh,” she said. “You come on with me,” she told Peter.

Peter wept. “But he’s drawing me in a picture,” he told her.

“Haven’t I told you about hanging around down here?”

“But he’s drawing me,” Peter crooking his arm about his face wept from some mature reserve of masculine vanity, seeing his life temporarily disrupted by a woman. But she took his hand and led him up the salmon stairs. At the turn she paused like a languorous damaged lily, and her dark eyes in which was all the despair of a subject race and a thinned blood become sterile except in the knowledge of the ancient sorrows of white and black, as a dog can see and hear things we cant, looked at us a moment. Then she was gone, and Peter’s weeping soon died away.

While Spratling finished his sketch I watched the noon become afternoon, the sunlight change from silver to gold (if I slept and waked, I think I could know afternoon from morning by the color of the sunlight) in spite of art and vice and everything else which makes a world; hearing the broken phrases of a race answering quickly to the compulsions of the flesh and then going away, temporarily freed from the body, to sweat and labor and sing; doomed again to repair to a temporary satisfaction; fleeting, that cannot last. The world: death and despair, hunger and sleep. Hunger that tolls the body along until life becomes tired of the burden.

Spratling finished his sketch and through an ineffable azure corridor, as peaceful as sleep, we passed. Here was spring in a paved street, between walls, and here was Peter, his sorrow forgotten, in a window, saying:

“When you come next time I bet I can spin that top.”
